---
layout: post
title: "On the Distopia of Software Updates"
date: 2009-03-30
categories: misc rant
---

Internet Explorer 8 or whatever is chapping my ass. Every time I log in to my
mail it throws this big message box at me, asking if I'd like to update. Only I
can't just hit "yes", get the update, and move on. It's got this multi-stage
process "next", and then "enter this" etc.

But whatever about the inconvenience. My problem is: why am I getting "Jehova's
Witnessned"? I've been accosted by this same message box several times now, and
my only option apparently is to keep saying "remind me later". How about f*ck
off?! Where's the button for that? _No, I don't want you to come back another
time. I want you to go away and never return._ 

__ 

This rant brings me to my next. Is it just me, or are software companies running
out of new widgets to offer? I switched from Yahoo! classic mail, to the new
mail, and it's worse. I'm checking mail. I don't need a bunch of reminders that
I have contacts, and would I like to invite them, and this business. I'm
serioius. Yahoo! mail offers this "invite your contacts" option, but there's no
easily ascertainable way to make the feature go away. So people I haven't
corresponded with in three years are popping up front and center in my mail
reader, and I'm just trying to quickly check my inbox, answer anything that can
be answered quickly, and go to the gym. Or go get a sandwhich. Or whatever. 
It's friggin' email. Characters of text launched over a wire to whoever
actually needs some info, or to whom I'd like to offer some.

Software changes tend, in the long run, to be helpful. People like me rant
about bad features, and they go away, or are made to be helpful. So things work
out
fine.