---
layout: post
title: "The Haters"
date: 2009-01-21
categories: person.olbermann person politics media person.rushlimbaugh person.rachelmaddow
---

Rush Limbaugh says that [he hopes President Obama will
fail](http://thinkprogress.org/2009/01/20/limbaugh-obama-fail/) . Is he serious?
Wow, this surprised me. His "reasoning" seems to be that, if Obama succeeds, he
will have succeeded only in ushering in _socialist_ solutions to our current
economic woes. Ergo, he must fail.

What's interesting here is that Limbaugh isn't saying that socialist policies 
_will_ fail (put aside, for now, what constitutes "socialist"), but rather that
if socialist policy succeeds, this is itself a failure for us. This, of course,
is a complete tangle. If an economic remedy _worked_ &mdash; if it succeeded
&mdash; by any measure of success I'm aware of, the country would be (somewhat
definitionally) _better off_ . Because the policy worked! And so, Limbaugh is
apparently at war with "socialistic policies" regardless of outcome. Now that's
an ideologue. Better that we plant both feet in traditional capitalism come hell
or high water than try non-capitalist policies, because God forbid _they might
work_ (and then what?).

Of course I'm not a "socialist"; this not what I'm getting at. It's just so over
the top to want a President to fail, just to preserve some view of the world.
This is not my view of America or politics generally.

On the other side of things, right-of-center thinkers especially, please take
time to watch Countdown with Keith Olbermann and immediately after The Rachel
Maddow Show. They're _so_ Rush Limbaugh. I get this perverse sense of
superiority watching people with such a simple rubric, their whole _raison
d'etre_ predicated on the proposition that "the other side" is evil. It's
really good viewing.

Mainly, lately, it's the simple idea with these shows that "Bush is evil".
That's it. I've been watching. That's pretty much it. It's an almost religious
calling to continually open wounds and fester them and spew forth venom at
George Bush. _Bush is an idiot, he should be accused of war crimes, he ruined
the country_ , and on and on. I keep hoping, but there seems no possibility of
acknowledging anything positive whatsoever about the Bush years. Nothing.
There's just this Limbaugh-like failure to accept or to even grasp the context
of the former Administration, and indeed the precarious place that we all
occupied in the wake of September 11.

Nothing but hatred... that's easy enough. What's harder is to try to figure out
what happened, why particular decisions were made, what effects they had
(positive and negative), and what can and should be done better next time. A
sober, thoughtful analysis. But you won't get this from Olbermann or Maddow.

In the same vein, Limbaugh ought to attempt a similar treatment of Obama's
current plans. But he won't. And so you won't get it from him either. And on and
on the haters
go.