---
layout: post
title: "The Trio"
date: 2009-01-23
categories: misc issues.health issues
---

I've long been interested in writing about our three favorite habits: alcohol,
caffeine, and nicotine. It's of course possible and perhaps even probable that
I'm interested only because I indulge regularly myself. A kind of self-interest,
as it were. But regardless, I'm here tonight to stand up in the group meeting
and admit my problem. Here goes.

This evening after work I'm sitting watching the news, drinking a glass of
Chianti, and it dawns on me, slowly, that something's wrong. Finally I pinpoint
it... _no coffee today_ . Not good. I drink, as a habit it should be told, two
to three cups of strong coffee every morning, without exception. And today I was
interupted working on the initial stages of my first cup, with no additional
coffee drinking in my day.

So, here I am, hours later, with a physical problem worming its way into my
awareness, and suddenly the nickel drops and it occurs to me that _I haven't
had enough caffeine_ . Ahhh. It all makes sense now. It explains how I'm dull,
headachy, almost depressed. I'm sluggish, uninteresting and uninterested. The
wine means nothing. In fact it's exacerbating my _situation_ .

So, I hate to admit it, but I'm soon trucking down to the local Starbucks, 6:30
in the evening, wine half drank sitting on the counter, ordering a Grande Latte,
with an _extra shot_ . The perky woman behind the counter, with the store
fairly dead by Starbucks standards, asks if (and I'm repeating this basically
verbatim) "I'd like another shot on the house". Huh? This is bar talk. Sure, I
reply, bellying up to the barista. Another shot of the stuff, and on the house,
lady! Now I'm looking around. Things seem better. Perhaps I should strike up
some random conversations with the other caffeinated souls perkily reading and
chatting and yacking around me. Maybe this place could get jumpin' after all!

Anyway, this is an interesting subject to me, this whole idea of our habits and
how we view them. And so I won't put off much longer my exploration of our
beloved trio; call it the _alcohol, caffeine, and nicotine diaries_ . More to
come.