---
layout: post
title: "2 + 2 = 5"
date: 2009-01-03
categories: issues issues.terrorism
---

Good God. The Breaking News on CNN. Israel is going into Gaza to root out
Hamas.

Here's a smattering of thoughts:

1. The media keeps pointing out that it'll be "very difficult" to separate
Hamas from the civilian population in Gaza. Right. _That's the point_ , isn't
it? After lobbing rockets into Israel, start the PR campaign for sympathy when
Israel retaliates. If Hamas is smart, they'll put their military installations
right next to the Grade Schools. That shows the cruelty of _Israel_ , not
Hamas, right? Dumb asses.

2. Why does Hamas keep talking about "ending aggression"? Are they on LSD? 
What about the damn rockets they're launching every day into Northern Israel? 
What is that? Diplomacy? I don't get it. I really don't get it. Suppose
Mexico started firing off missiles into Tucson, or El Paso, or wherever. Sure,
that's aggression. Then the U.S. (after scratching its collective head for a
while), has some response, maybe with the aim of stopping missiles from hitting
American cities. The whole "protect our citizens" thing. 

But then Calderon gets on the loud speaker, and goes on CNN, and starts talking
about the _American aggression_ , as if Mexico hadn't launched any missiles. 
Just bald faced starts talking like that. (Why? Because _screw um'_ , that's
why!). 

Are you serious? This is a scenario that, literally, my eight year old daughter
could sort out. What a freakin' farce. Won't someone just say it?

3. It seems obvious to me that anyone, without prior political machinations,
would conclude that Hamas is convinced that Israel, as a country, as a nation
state, should _not be in the Middle East_ (and maybe should die horribly,
too). Apparently, they feel justified in creating all manner of mayhem to drive
them away. Fine (I guess fine, not really fine). But it would be great for the
rest of us if Hamas would stop the "save us from the aggression of the
Israelis!" speak. Just say you hate the Jews, and you want to kill them. There
would be more dignity in it. 

Anyway, I'm sure someone can sensitize me to the issue, no doubt at the expense
of common sense. (Now that's progress! Talking out your rear is
progress!)