---
layout: post
title: "Keith Olbermann's Really Special Comment"
date: 2009-01-19
categories: person.olbermann person media issues issues.terrorism person.georgewbush
---

<iframe src="http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/22425001/vp/28740622#28740622"
frameborder="0" width="425" scrolling="no" height="339"> </iframe> <style
type="text/css"> .msnbcLinks {font-size:11px; font-family:Arial, Helvetica,
sans-serif; color: #999; margin-top: 5px; background: transparent; text-align:
center; width: 425px;} .msnbcLinks a {text-decoration:none !important;
border-bottom: 1px dotted #999 !important; font-weight:normal !important;
height: 13px;} .msnbcLinks a:link, .msnbcLinks a:visited {color: #5799db
!important;} .msnbcLinks a:hover, .msnbcLinks a:active {color:#CC0000
!important;} </style> 

<p class="msnbcLinks"> Visit msnbc.com for [Breaking
News](http://www.msnbc.msn.com/) , [World
News](http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/3032507) , and [News about the
Economy](http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/3032072) </p> 

<p> Perhaps it's not NYT's Paul Krugman, as I suggested
[here](http://thethaxis.blogspot.com/2009/01/tone-in-washington.html) , but
rather media personality Keith Olbermann, who is most energetically expressing
the anger from the wider-circulated Left about the Bush Administration's
policies regarding fighting terrorism after September 11. His moral indignation
cannot best be captured with just words, I don't think, and so (another first on
this blog), here's the video. </p> <p> These are Mr. Olbermann's concluding
remarks, by the way, on Martin Luther King day and on the eve of the
inauguration of President-Elect Obama. A little ironic, maybe, given that MLK
did not strike a particularly litigious tone, and that Mr. Obama seems intent on
moving forward and healing wounds &mdash; bridging gaps &mdash; between the
Right and Left with his upcoming Presidency. If President-Elect Obama is
watching Keith Olbermann's program at all, he's certainly getting confirmation
from cable news media that [the road ahead will be
long](http://edition.cnn.com/2008/POLITICS/11/04/obama.transcript/) , indeed. 
</p> <p> (Incidentally, I'm sure there's a better way to embed the video, but I
couldn't find it on blogspot from my brief perusal of the options. I'll look
into it. Also, if time is an issue with viewing, the last 2 - 2.5 minutes are I
think of most value, although the clip _in toto_ is quite worth it as well.)
</p>