---
layout: post
title: "List of Scientists who Dissent from Global Warming View"
date: 2009-12-12
categories: issues.globalwarming
---

For some reason, my GW believer buddies seem perpetually skeptical that there
are substantial numbers of reputable scientists who are dubious about
anthropogenic warming. It's clear however there are many scientists who are
skeptical of the anthropogenic warming claim (i.e., human-caused Global Warming,
which I often abbreviate as "Global Warming" or just "GW" on this blog, separate
from "global warming" (no caps), which is the claim that the Earth is warming,
without specifying a cause).

I found 700 skeptical scientists in the U.S. Senate EPW report 
[here](http://epw.senate.gov/public/index.cfm?FuseAction=Minority.Blogs&ContentRecord_id=2674E64F-802A-23AD-490B-BD9FAF4DCDB7)
. Wikipedia has a (much smaller, but still significant) list 
[here](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_scientists_opposing_the_mainstream_scientific_assessment_of_global_warming)
.

An excerpt from the Senate report:

"

Highlights of the Updated 2008/2009 Senate Minority Report featuring over 700
international scientists dissenting from man-made climate fears: 

“I am a skeptic…Global warming has become a new religion.” - Nobel Prize Winner
for Physics, Ivar Giaever. 

“Since I am no longer affiliated with any organization nor receiving any
funding, I can speak quite frankly….As a scientist I remain skeptical...The main
basis of the claim that man’s release of greenhouse gases is the cause of the
warming is based almost entirely upon climate models. We all know the frailty of
models concerning the air-surface system.” - Atmospheric Scientist Dr. Joanne
Simpson, the first woman in the world to receive a PhD in meteorology, and
formerly of NASA, who has authored more than 190 studies and has been called
“among the most preeminent scientists of the last 100 years.” 

Warming fears are the “worst scientific scandal in the history…When people come
to know what the truth is, they will feel deceived by science and scientists.” -
UN IPCC Japanese Scientist Dr. Kiminori Itoh, an award-winning PhD environmental
physical chemist. 

“The IPCC has actually become a closed circuit; it doesn’t listen to others. It
doesn’t have open minds… I am really amazed that the Nobel Peace Prize has been
given on scientifically incorrect conclusions by people who are not geologists.”
- Indian geologist Dr. Arun D. Ahluwalia at Punjab University and a board member
of the UN-supported International Year of the Planet.

"