---
layout: post
title: "On Force"
date: 2009-10-25
categories: iran politics issues.guncontrol wmd
---

So following up on my prior post, I've refined my view to the following
non-refined firehose-on-all position:

Let everyone have weapons! The whole problem is in the policing. Who is the
U.S., the "First World" to say what-have-you to any other nation state? I want
every nation on the planet the opportunity to have nuclear weapons. Iran?
Nuclear warheads that can reach the mainland. The guy following you on the
sidewalk, as you guide your kids and grumpy wife towards the ice cream shop
(just four more blocks, honey!)? A loaded .44. He after all hasn't DONE anything
yet. He's a person, not some statistic to be manipulated by The Man. Who made
some government RULER of his free choices? Who made the U.S. Government RULER of
some other nation-state's free choices? Iran, nukes. All the world, nukes. No
more bully cops, please. Deadly force everywhere; not that we wish it for its
own sake, but only that we have no reason to deny it, while our government
itself wields it around.

So I think this position ought to be consistent, in the sense that all of my
knee-jerk Liberal friends (but they have the truth!), and my knee-jerk
Conservative friends (but they have the truth!) ought to see the value in a
hands off policy when it comes to non-felons and non-warring other
nation-states, like Joe Bob, or Iran. It's not what they _might_ do, or even
what they say they might do, Dick Cheney. It's the question of what gives the
current jerks-with-deadly-force the right to _take away_ from them, or to
prevent them from acquiring, for fear of what they _might_ do. Who are we to
police everyone inside and out, on grounds of what might happen tomorrow?
Suppose I buy an AR-15. I might shoot up the mall. Suppose Iran buys weaponized
nukes. They might shoot up the Middle East. Neither has happened. So screw off!

We all desire _freedom_ , as W. once said. He must have secretly admired Iran.
Get the NRA to help them with messaging, W. They'll assert their _rights_ to
nuclear yet. As Timothy McVeigh recited, creepily, moments before his execution
by the State: ... I am the captain of my ship...". And so he was. And so we
are.