---
layout: post
title: "The Tone in Washington"
date: 2009-01-18
categories: theory person person.obama person.georgewbush theory.pragmatism
---

Two recent columns, from the New York Times and Washington Post, respectively,
pretty much book-end the "Bush was evil, Bush was good" debate. On one end, Paul
Krugman wants to [charge Bush with war
crimes](http://www.nytimes.com/2009/01/16/opinion/16krugman.html?_r=1) . On the
other, Charles Krauthammer asks us [to acknowledge our debt to
Bush](http://www.statesman.com/opinion/content/editorial/stories/01/01/17/0117krauthammer_edit.html)
.

Whether you're liberal or conservative minded, have a look. It's worth reading
them back to back.

<p> For my part, I always get a little uncomfortable when intelligent people
reach such radically different conclusions from (one would assume) the same set
of facts and observations. Feels a little nihilistic to me, like there's no real
fact of the matter, only different and perhaps too firmly held opinions,
determined by fundamentally different, and incompatible, ideologies. Yet,
perhaps our problem is not so much our failure to find objective truths but
rather the way that we find (or think we find) them, by constructing political
ideologies &mdash; broad, sweeping systems that purport to explain the political
world around us and to determine how we ought to think and act. Perhaps. </p> 
<p> To be sure, a scepticism of _ideology_ is not new to America. It
undergirds an intellectual movement &mdash; pragmatism&mdash; that emerged here
in the 19th century with Constitutional scholars like Oliver Wendel Holmes Jr.,
as well as philosophers such as Charles Pierce, William James, Dewey and others.
The emergence of American pragmatism in the 19th century is, like many
intellectual movements, multifarious, but at least in part and perhaps centrally
it can be seen as a response to the idealism that helped ignite a powder keg,
the American Civil War. As Holmes, who fought bitterly in the Civil War as a
young man and who nearly died there in battle, wondered: if all of our ideals
led us to the carnage of the Civil War &mdash; if our politicians and
intellectuals couldn't save us from nearly tearing the Union apart &mdash; of
what moral and practical benefit were those ideals? His thought of course found
its expression in monumental works like The Common Law. His contemporaries
&mdash; James, Pierce, and Dewey &mdash; wrote the more theoretical
underpinnings of political pragmatism and are still part of the philosophical
canon (though perhaps, after World War II, less so). </p> <p> President-Elect
Obama may or may not be a pragmatist, in the grand tradition of Holmes and the
great 19th century philosophers. He is fond of studying Lincoln, I hear (a good
sign). At any rate, we will indeed need change in Washington. First on the list,
I hope, will be a change in the often too partisan tone. I'm hopeful that Mr.
Obama's eloquent words and to some early extent his first deeds as
President-Elect signal just that. </p> <p> </p> <p> </p>