---
layout: post
title: "Maj. Nidal Malik Hasan"
date: 2009-11-11
categories: politics crime terrorism
---

On the back and forth in the media as to whether the Fort Hood suspected shooter
was an Islamic terrorist.

Ugh. I don't like labels either. So, think of it this way, and I'll leave you to
your own conclusions. Timothy McVeigh, white dude with sympathies with the KKK,
a virulent dislike of government authority over individual citizens, and a
profound belief in guns rights and the right of revolution, is commonly known
and we expect will stay known as a terrorist. Yet, here is a guy,
disenfranchised by the military (he failed the physical exams for U.S. Special
Forces), unable to secure a meaningful job after his military career (he worked
as a security guard), frustrated by his inability to attract a mate (his
co-worker Andrea Peters shunned his advances), and turning to a destructive
lifestyle (he became an obsessive gambler), who by all accounts seems to fit the
mold of an increasingly unattached and ultimately psychochotic lone killer. So,
why is he only a Terrorist? Apparently this simple label, for most of us, fits
just fine with him. But why? Because he _wasn't_ deranged? Or psychotic?

If one digs into this comparison, it eventually becomes clear that "Muslim
terrorist" is treated differently than the anti-government radical white dude.
In the the latter case, there's an unmistakeable eagerness to attach belief
system to violence. In the former, it's quite the opposite. Wow!

To make my point clearly and once again, imagine the feeling of bizarrness if
McVeigh, in some alternate universe, was no longer a terrorist after the
Olkahoma City Bombing, but simply a psychotic, sexually frustrated, lonely
ex-military guy who just needed the right treatment, if only we could have
recognized the symptoms early enough. Imagine if we blamed the military, and the
U.S. government (he railed against excessive taxation), and all things
governmental. so stifling to sensitive, stressed out McVeigh. This kind of bull
shit gloss would never fly for the guy who eviscerated 168 people in that
horrific terrorist act, and it repays careful attention why in Maj. Nidal Malik
Hasan's case, there is currently such a raging debate as to whether he was just
sick, or something more. McVeigh, always, was just that something more. And if
one is truly Enlightened, as I am, one would see that McVeigh was treated as a
moral actor, an autonomous agent, and Maj. Hasan is on his way to being treated
like an effect of so many causes outside of himself. And in this way, weirdly,
perhaps we do win the battle of words, in Orwellian fashion perhaps, by making
those enemies under the panoply of our political correctness not true humans,
but only poor actors in dramas that they themselves did not and could not
create. Only big bad Western World could create them, you see. We win by
proclaiming our guilt.

Then again, maybe we're just chicken shit. And maybe our chicken shit nature is
why McVeigh has his label, and others,
theirs.