---
layout: post
title: "The Democrat's Dilemma"
date: 2009-01-29
categories: person.nancypelosi economy.stimulus economy
---

Republicans and Democrats share a history of legislative shenanigans, to be
sure. And though Republicans are suddenly sounding reasonable when discussing
the pork in the latest stimulus bill on its way to the Senate (after passing in
the House 244 - 188, with all Republicans voting against), the traditional
Republican mantra of tax relief for the upper and upper middle class would
certainly be a bad proposal in today's recession.

But, again, Republican talking points today seem much more reasonable. _Contra_
 Bob Herbert, who writes in the NYT today that we should all just stop listening
to the minority party (nice spirit of bi-partisanship, Mr. Herbert), I think the
minority party, in its opposition, is helping improve the pork-ridden bill and
hence is serving the public's interest.

They're doing this in two ways. One, they're caterwauling about the obvious pork
in the bill. Indeed some of the more egregious examples of pork have already
been removed, like hundreds of millions for contraceptives under the guise of a
family planning expansion promoted by House Speaker Nancy Pelosi. (Give initial
credit for removal of this lu lu to George Stephanopoulos, who raised this issue
 [in an interview](http://abcnews.go.com/ThisWeek/story?id=6725512&amp;page=1)
with Pelosi on ABCs "This Week". Also it was President Obama who, officially,
requested it be dropped. Bravo.) Resodding the White House lawn also got nixed.

Two, they're asking the hard questions about where _the stimulus_ actually
resides in the stimulus bill, questions that I think point to real problems that
the majority Democrats seem curiously sanguine about, given the severity of the
economic crisis.

For instance, the Congressional Budget Office released a troubling analysis of
the proposed bill, calculating that only about 20% of the 816 billion will be
spent in fiscal 2009. So much for shovel ready. And there's the troubling fact
that, of this, only about 30 billion is tagged for infrastructure spending.

So, where is the money going? Well, to entitlement programs and special interest
groups, of course:

<ul> <li> 2 billion for child care subsidies </li> <li> 50 million to the
National Endowment for the Arts (NEA) </li> <li> 400 million for global warming
research </li> <li> 2.4 billion for carbon capture projects </li> <li> 650
million for digital TV conversion coupons </li> <li> 87 billion for Medicaid
</li> <li> 1 billion for nutrition programs </li> <li> 66 billion for
education spending </li> </ul> 

And on and on.

To be sure, some of this spending is laudable, and provides funding for worthy
goals (like funding the arts, or modernizing the Smithsonian). But if it's
really job creation that we're trying to accomplish, it's hard to understand the
distribution of funds. For example, the unemployment rate for government workers
is a mere 2.3% today, and in the education and health sectors it's only 3.8%.
Yet fully 39% of the 550 billion allocated for spending &mdash; the rest is tax
relief &mdash; targets these sectors. This is particularly puzzling when we
consider the unemployment rates in the sectors hit hardest by the recession:
8.3% in manufacturing, and 15.2% in construction. As Alan Reynolds of the CATO
Institute points out today in the WSJ, "If the intent of the plan is to
alleviate unemployment, why spend over half of the money on sectors where
unemployment is lowest?" Hmm.

So, here's the Democrat's Dilemma. They don't need the lowly Republicans to pass
President Obama's stimulus plan; it'll likely sail through the Senate without
major modification just as it did the House. And then it'll be law. But, if it's
judged a failure in the coming years, they'll be solely responsible for it.
Republicans, for their part, can look reasonable by simply pointing at the facts
of the bill. They may get blamed for throwing out the spirit of bi-partisanship,
but they have the pork in the bill and the puzzling distribution of funds to
keep talking about. No one will care about their stubbornness today, if in a few
years the stimulus is viewed as a Democratic christmas tree, full of
entitlements and goodies for Americans, but a very flawed piece of legislation
given its ostensible purpose.

And so it goes. As Speaker Pelosi put it, "We won, we write the bill".
Indeed.