---
layout: post
title: "Hi, I'm Dr. Fox"
date: 2009-03-30
categories: theory.prediction economy
---

Nicholas Kristof of the NYT writes an amusing piece on the predictions of
experts. He's interested in the so-called "Dr. Fox effect", based originally on
a series of psychology experiments where a phony expert gave well-received but
meaningless presentations. In more general form the Fox Effect refers to the
tendency of otherwise savvy consumers of information to over-value the
predictive capabilities of people who have educational credentials.

Classic example? Of course we all know: the economists! Other sooth sayers
include scientists and social scientists (sociologists, political scientists)
who model the past behavior of complex systems and present their conclusions as
having predictive &mdash; not just descriptive &mdash; authority. Who will be a
world power a decade from now? Dr. Fox will tell you. Will we have a shortage of
food in 25 years? Will the world witness a population explosion? A resurgent
Russia? Chinese economic dominance? A nuclear war? (I would add: will Florida be
under water from Global Warming in two decades?!) Dr. Fox will tell you. He's
got the magical ability to take descriptions of the past, precisely cast in
mathematical language, and transform them into predictions of the future.

Philip Tetlock, a Cal Berkely professor &mdash; the "expert on experts" as
Kristof calls him &mdash; wrote a book on the Fox Effect, "Expert Political
Judgement", in 2005. In it he tracked two decades of predictions, 82,000 in all,
from 284 experts. The predictions were tagged by those in the experts' field of
study and "on subjects that they knew little about." I'll let Kristof tell you
the result:

"...The predictions of experts were, on average, only a tiny bit better than
random guesses â€” the equivalent of a chimpanzee throwing darts at a board."

That's striking enough. I'll add some comments of my own:

(1) People reason: "If not the expert, then who?", which ignores the fact that
judgement and common sense are often more valuable than credentials when it
comes to complicated inferences about the future. Indeed, Tetlock notes that the
one key indicator of poor predictive performance was _fame_ ; those experts who
were widely recognized as such, consistently did _worse_ .

(2) Complex systems &mdash; like the economy &mdash; are scary as hell, because
no one (literally no one) understands how things will turn out. And,
unfortunately, most of the world we care about is complex in this sense. There
aren't any "Diffy Qs", as physics students say, to tell us some outcome at time
t + n for any n with much of a value at all. But the experts make us feel
better. They talk in sophisticated language, they explain what happened in the
past (note that with regard to _past_ events, they really are experts), and
they tell us what it means for the future. We want to know what's coming around
the bend, and some people seem capable of telling us.

We just don't notice that they keep getting it wrong. They don't know what will
happen tomorrow, anymore than you.

Read and be bummed out by our lack of predictive capabilities 
[here.](http://www.nytimes.com/2009/03/26/opinion/26Kristof.html?ref=opinion)