---
layout: post
title: "2008, Bummer for GW Believers"
date: 2008-12-28
categories: issues.globalwarming issues
---

The planet [cooled this
year](http://www.guardian.co.uk/environment/2008/dec/05/climate-change-weather)
, compared with the last eight (which makes it accurate to proclaim "it's the
coolest year in the 21st century!"). This is fine for a punch line. But what's
the deal? The Guardian article cites a [team of
researchers](http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2008/jun/07/climatechange) 
from Kiev University that predicted, back in March, "...that natural variation
would mask the 0.3C warming predicted by the Intergovernment Panel on Climate
Change over the next decade. They said that global temperatures would remain
constant until 2015 but would then begin to accelerate."

Great, but problem is, I've been Googling around and finding lots of cock-sure
predictions by GW believers that the warming is already accelerating, not going
into a flat period before it unleashes its fury sometime later (type in "global
warming accelerating" for about a thousand assurances from the GW "experts" that
we're screwed). So, are we leveled off until 2015, after which we'll begin our
Warming Acceleration? Or are we accelerating right now, and 2008 is some weird
anomaly, to be replaced by a warmer 2009, and an even warmer 2010, and so on? 
What the heck's going on? I'm sure the experts can explain.

The reality is, [Global Warming](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Global_warming)
is B.S. (oh, I mean IMHO it's B.S.), and the point will be made clear enough in
the years that follow by nature itself. My guess is that we're headed for
cooler temperatures this century. I could be wrong (of course), and given that
I'm trying to maintain some degree of epistemic humility, I'll hold off, for
now, launching a Web site dedicated to shaming everyone into investing in
technologies that _warm our planet_ and shield us from the new Ice Age to
come...