---
layout: post
title: "Gettin' it Straight"
date: 2008-12-17
categories: misc
---

The Credit Crisis. Auto bailouts. Stock market in turmoil. What does it mean,
and who has the answers? Let's start with some clarification of terms. _Define
your terms_ , as philosophers teach us. So I'll try to do just that, and I'll
pick as my subject matter a set of terms that we constantly use, that have
different meanings though it's common to view subsets of them as in essence the
same (or at least having substantial overlap), and that are particularly
germaine given our current circumstances. The terms are:

Geek

Nerd

Dork

Tool

Jerk

Asshole

Prick

Douche Bag

Dumb ass

Pinwheel

Let's get started. In what follows I'll define the term, then offer some
exemplar from popular culture to tack down the definition. I'm confident that
the conflations will melt away, to the edification of all.

First, a geek. Contrary to popular opinion, a geek _is not a nerd_ . Don't
conflate them, folks. A geek is someone that drills into a particular subject
with a zest that borders on the maniacal. But (and this is important), he does
his drilling at the expense of, say, hygiene, or social skills. The classic geek
is the computer geek. _Moooove_ . But geeks find homes in other technical
disciplines as well. Nicholas Cage's character in The Rock, Stanley Goodspeed,
was a geek.

The nerd. Ah yes, the nerd. Nerds are boring, unathletic types that tend to fall
into nerdy routines (like getting up at the same time, having coffee, listening
to some soothing music, leaving the house at the same time, etc.). Nerds are
terrible with the opposite sex, tend to be abstemious (being too "smart" for
vice), and are by definition socially unattractive to non-nerds and in
particular to members of the opposite sex that are non-nerds. In other words,
they're smart, with nothing else. Nerds. Classic nerd is Marty McFly, from Back
to the Future. Also, Ross from Friends (though a borderline case, since Ross had
a greater than zero chance that a woman would find him attractive). 

Dorks. Dorks are nerds with less native intelligence. A dork looks and sounds
like a nerd but talks about his car, or his recipe for Jalapeno macaroni salad.
Dorks tend to watch a lot of sports on T.V., and may wear sports insignia,
especially on dates, or to nice restaurants.

Tool. Interesting type, the tool. Tools are smart, mostly successful, with
something more to offer than can be managed by geeks, nerds, or dorks. A tool
will be _at least_ one of: attractive, athletic, or sociable. Tools are tools
essentially because they follow the rules. A tool made it into a good law
school, dresses nice, may have an attractive mate, and refuses to buy beer for
the neighbor kid (though he's known him for years). A tool may inform on
classmates for cheating. He rarely speeds. Tools generally end up running
things. (Don't worry, however, because they're still tools.)

Jerk. Low class, mean spirited, don't give a damn types. Chet from Weird
Science. You can almost substitute "jackass" for jerk, though there is some
small semantic difference.

Asshole. Jerks that have made something of themselves. Colonel Nathan R. Jessup
from A Few Good Men. 'Nuff said.

Prick. Pricks are assholes with an innate and ineradicable sense of entitlement.
They're high society about their assholiness. It's an important distinction. You
can't call a prick an asshole without a palpable degree of imprecision: "No,
he's a _prick_ , Bob. Get it straight". Hardy Jenns, from the 1987 Some Kind of
Wonderful, was a classic prick.

Douche Bag. The douche bag. This is generally a lower management type that makes
everyone in the room (or office) go mum when he walks in. Like a Pez Dispenser
he pops out company lines with a shitty smile, poring cold water all over your
once hot but now extinguished conversation about the weekend's activities, or
the new girl in office 101. The douche bag would be a standard issue nerd or
dork, only there's an additional moral deficiency with the DB; the bag wants to
climb up the management ladder, and _at your expense_ . Go mum when you spot
the Douche Bag. He's only gonna cause you pain. (The silver lining, however, is
that DBs tend to get their comeuppance, having more desire for Machiavellian
conniving than actual ability, and tending always to repel all things cool.
Exemplar? Hard to find. Best that comes to mind is Carter Burke, the character
played by Paul Reiser in Aliens. Douche bag. But anyway in spite of the dearth
of DBs in popular culture, I know several from past jobs. I bet you do too.)

Dumb ass. Nerds and even dorks may have something to say within their sphere of
expertise, but dumb asses, by definition, always come up short. Dumb asses
speak, and every non-dumb ass starts an imaginary stop watch, waiting for the
cessation of dumb ass sounds. The "Oh" guy from Office Space is a classic dumb
ass.

Pinwheel. A pinwheel is someone who may or not be smart about something, but
seems drawn, like a moth to a flame, to sound off about other subjects about
which he has only enthusiasm without accompanying expertise. Pinwheels come out
of the woodwork when discussions turn to politics. Classic pinwheel? There are
lots. Clooney can be a pinwheel, as can "green" actors like DiCaprio. In fact,
pretty much any Hollywood actor with strong views on political issues is sure to
adorn him or herself with _fluffy pinwheel attire_ . Ashton Kutcher sounds
more than a little pinwheely at times. These pinwheels, the Hollywood variety
(a common strain of pinwheel), all suffer from the false belief that their sheer
attractiveness somehow promotes their opinions to bedrock truth. Maybe, but only
for other pinwheels (this is key). Also, fourteen year olds.

So there you have it. In the midst of these dire times, a get to the point, hard
hitting, good ole' fashioned linguistic analysis of the nouns whose referents
we're seeing more and more of these days. Let's get it
straight.