---
layout: post
title: "The Sea"
date: 2008-11-24
categories: misc
---

People were scattered around the beach, laughing, drinking, warming themselves
with daytime fires as he walked along the shore and into the rocks, around a
bend, and then out of sight. The sun was beginning to set out across the
expanse of the Pacific; the orange horizon bent with the curve of the Earth. It
is beautiful, he thought.

The sea surged over partially submersed crags, charging forward quickly toward
him, swirling with turbulence and a power that crashed onto the shoreline
boulders he walked among, only to retreat again in swirls and froth into the
depths. It is not safe, he thought. _It is beautiful_ .

It washed up over his feet, barely, and he stood and breathed deeply. But the
rocks, now slippery, failed him, and he slipped. He hadn't considered this; his
only precaution was not to get too close, to avoid getting knocked down by the
surging sea. But he just slipped. And into this monster of sea he went.

When the currents pulled him out, like flotsam, his chest heaved as he flung
himself back toward shore. He thought to cry out but decided instead to swim. 
Swim. It was just panic. It was just panic. The shadows on the shore had
grown larger and the thought of struggling in this immense leviathan of
blackness approaching from above and below was too much. _It was just panic_ .

When he reached one of the boulders, partially submerged, he felt lucky that it
protruded for him momentarily above the surging water. He climbed onto it,
heart pounding, gasping. Out of the sea he grew calmer, and then he almost
laughed, realizing that he'd not (until that moment) thought of the horrific maw
of large sharks coming up to him from beneath. He had been consumed with not
drowning. A triumph of sorts. Moments later the sea came again, and his white
bloodless hands slipped off of the surface as he was pulled again into its
awesome power. It drove him violently forward toward the boulders, and
helplessly he was flung onto the jagged rocks. But this did it. In this moment
he grasped a protruding crag and clung fast as the sea turned back again in its
endless cycle. He was alive.

His boots were gone. He walked, wet, shaken, barefoot, back to the beach. A
large camp had stoked to life a bonfire, and grinning faces circled it,
laughing, talking. He walked up, and smiled, and said hardly a word all that
good, long night. It was
beautiful.