---
layout: post
title: "The Terrorists"
date: 2008-11-26
categories: person issues issues.terrorism person.rachelmaddow person.obama person.georgewbush
---

Muslim militants are [at it
again](http://news.yahoo.com/s/ap/20081127/ap_on_re_as/as_india_shooting) .
Shocker.

101 people dead and counting. Here we go again. And in America, the conspicuous
disappearance of any public discussion about terrorism for some time now. As if,
 _it's a Bush topic_ . Somehow, some way, in our domestic self-absorption, I
think we've managed to connect the unpopular President Bush with the idea of 
_terrorism_ , as if, ridding ourselves of the one, the other will somehow go
away, or just be a non-factor. But of course it won't go away, as we've seen
tonight.

I confess to shedding Oprah Tears (or, I mean, getting stricken with
Obamamania). But now the hard realities. Politic campaigns, Democrats back in
power, none of this represents a _solution_ ; we haven't solved anything yet.
Obama hasn't solved anything yet. He doesn't even have the job yet (yet somehow
the world has seemed a safer, better place, hasn't it?). And what a job he will
have. The militants in Mumbai, apparently, checked passports to round up the
Americans and Brits. Nice to confirm that we're still the evil ones. And I'm
sure we'll retain the title for some time, whether our new President has a
Southern drawl or not. They don't care. President Elect can sound like Albert
Einstein (actually, that might be a tad too _tutonic_ , but you get the
picture). He's still representing the Evil Nation, as far as extremists are
concerned.

So now the blood on the streets, and the fires, and the frantic shouts are with
us once again. And we hear once again that they were targeting the U.S. and
Great Britain. It's I think safe to reject the notion that the Mumbai attackers
didn't tune in to CNN recently enough to know that Barack Obama is our President
Elect. They don't care.

Addendum

Poor Rachel Maddow. She's been yuck yucking it up lately, feeling the Obamamania
oh-so-much. And now to see her somber face, talking off of the teleprompter
about terrorists targeting Americans, doing her level best to keep up the
light-spirited Bush-is-a-dummy banter in the rest of her show. _Damned breaking
news_ . Yes, damned indeed. I do hope that I'm wrong. But those dark days of
September 11 never left us. We just wished them
away.