---
layout: post
title: "Wackonomists"
date: 2008-10-29
categories: economy
---

[Interesting
article](http://www.statesman.com/opinion/content/editorial/stories/10/29/1029wackonomics_edit.html)
 from an economics professor at George Mason University. "Wackonomists", as he
calls them, are those who think that a lot of complex economic phenomena can be
explained by invoking corporate "greed". Yes, greed, the great Satan, and the
key to understanding the global economy, didn't you know? I'm not so sure. Not
that it doesn't exist, but as a comprehensive theory purporting to explain an
extremely complex, interconnected global phenomenon, I must say it smacks of
ideological oversimplification. I think it reveals, in particular, the
(seemingly) perpetual Ivory Tower Manichaeistic tendency: _good versus evil_ .
Free marketers versus the Enlightened ones. Bad = free markets (is it because
they're free, or because they grant The Greedy Ones free reign?). Good = the
Enlightened ones (anyone who derides Capitalism, especially with a pitch that
borders on the Pentacostal).

Yes, the Enlightened ones, those with very little hard economic support for
their position (you never hear them exclaim "We're richer now that we're
Marxists!"), but plenty of ideological fervor to push a particular
interpretation of "fairness" into the public sphere. Damn the hard economic
realities, this is what's _fair_ (and of course, like all philosophical
theories, it's actually a particular interpretation of "fair", and widely
debated). 

Anyway, the economics prof, Walter E. Williams, argues an interesting, if tongue
in cheek, theory: if "greedy oil company CEOs" drove gas prices up so high,
what accounts for the precipitous drop in crude now, from $147 to currently $64
a barrel? Following the "wackonomists" logic, _we must have much less greed
now_ . Greed, thankfully, is down. Rejoice. 

Doubtful the wackonomists would agree. I'm sure they'd prefer instead a careful
analysis of geopolitical and global economic conditions, a true analysis of
cause and effect to explain this downward trend. Prices going up? Greeeeed. 
Down? Not less greed, never. The Evil Ones never rest. 

Sounds like bait and switch. Or just fuzzy headed. Moving forward I think
we'll need a little more sensitive instruments than we've come to expect from
the highly
politicized...