---
layout: post
title: "The Puzzling Economy"
date: 2008-11-26
categories: economy.creditcrisis theory economy
---

What is the relation between economic theory and prosperity? It damn perplexes
me. But I'm no economist. Still, consider: many of us are convinced that FDR's
Keynesian approach helped pull us out of the Great Depression (but NYT luminary
Paul Krugman has argued, recently that [FDR botched
it](http://www.nytimes.com/2008/11/10/opinion/10krugman.html?hp) by not doing
enough). And many of us are convinced that Reagan's supply side changes helped
usher in the prosperity of the late 80s and 90s. Two radically different
policies. So I ask: what's the real connection between economic theory and
prosperity? I suspect it is tied very closely to circumstances. Very
complicated circumstances.

On the extremes, things get easier to figure out: really bad economic policy is
highly correlated with really low levels of prosperity. But somewhere in the
middle (say, with regulated markets, like in the U.S.), it's hard to figure out
what worked before, and pray tell, what will work again. As Nassim Nicholas
Taleb suggests in his eminently readable "The Black Swan, The Impact of the
Highly Improbable", maybe our best strategy is just to have smart, open-minded
people keep tinkering in hopes that the right recipe will emerge. Trial and
error. And when something finally works, we'll take credit for it, _ex post
facto_ , as if it was just obvious that X was the way (someone-very-close-to-me
tells me that these Latin phrases are distracting and pedantic, like this long
parenthetical, _Godelian_ remark).

Anyway, such is the nature of things. We need to keep up the illusion that
we're _on it_ . And when the next big innovation comes, the markets will free
up, and prosperity will (again) be ours. And a politician will take all of the
credit.