---
layout: post
title: "You Do Want To Express Yourself, Don't You?"
date: 2014-05-11
categories: 
---

Tumblr, it seems, is [bucking the
trend](http://www.theverge.com/2014/5/6/5684212/tumblr-declares-war-on-the-internets-identity-crisis)
 on the Web toward one size fits all. Tublr founder David Karp says the Web
used to be chaotic and messy, to be sure, but also more fun, and personal. Back
in the salad days of the Web (before, say, the early 2000s), the lack of
standards meant more of your personality and creativity could be expressed on
blogs and websites. Today, the utilitarian focus in the Valley, and the
engineer's mindset of efficiency and control, have slowly squeezed out such
possibilities, ironically rendering a Web obsessed with buzzwords like
"personalization" must less personal. 

Karp's not a lone voice here, either. Jaron Lanier, Virtual Reality pioneer and
author of the 2010 hit _You Are Not A Gadget_ argues the same point. In fact,
Lanier's critique&mdash;first in YANAG then in his 2013 sequel W _ho Owns The
Future?_ &mdash;is more trenchant than the milquetoast remarks from Karp
bemoaning the cookie-cutter trends on the modern Web. Lanier, for instance,
thinks that so-called Web 2.0 designs favor machines and efficiency, literally
at the expense of "personhood" itself. For Lanier, the individual creator has
no real home on the Web these days, as sites like Facebook force people to
express their personalities in multiple choice layouts and formatted input
boxes. To Lanier, these surface designs evidence even deeper attacks on
personhood, like redefining the very notion of "friend" to something shallow and
unimportant. The Web is dominated by a "hivemind" mentality where no one person
really matters, and the collective is serving some greater purpose, like
building smarter machines. The Web, concludes Lanier, is set up to capture the
machine-readable features of people for advertising purposes and other demeaning
anti-humanist ends, not to enlarge and empower them as individuals. 

Still, if you're a Lanier fan, Mr. Karp's remarks seem headed in the right
direction, even if only because you can now customize the look and feel of your
Tumblr blog on your mobile device. But the deeper question here is whether you
have anything much to say on a blog in the first place, and whether the Web
environment is cordial and prepared to hear it, if you do. Maybe Tumblr's
counter-steer is minimal, but one hopes that further and more meaningful changes
are still to come. <div> 

</div>