---
layout: post
title: "Limiting Results in Science"
date: 2014-01-31
categories: 
---

Nicolaus Copernicus published his magnus opus, De Revolutionibus Orbium
Coelestium, in 1543, shortly before he died. With it, a series of sea changes
rippled through Western Europe, and in the relatively miniscule span of about
two hundred years, with Isaac Newton's publication of the Principia Mathematica,
the Scientific Revolution had transformed the western world. Before Copernicus
the average 16th Century European believed the Earth was at the center of the
cosmos, and the universe was governed by teleological principles first
elucidated by Aristotle thousands of years ago. The fusion of Aristotelian
cosmology and physics with the Judeo-Christian tradition in Scholastic thinkers
like Saint Thomas Aquinas provided Western Europe with a universe filled with
purpose and destiny in the coming of Christ, and in the artistic vision and
genius of Dante the great story of the universe and our place in it found a
common expression. This was the world into which Copernicus published his
heliocentric model of the universe. 

From the beginning, though, the Copernican Revolution as it came to be called,
was a strange fusion of religious vision and empirical science. On the one
hand, Copernicus realized that Tycho Brahe's cosmology was hopelessly
convoluted. Since Plato, astronomers had assumed that celestial orbits would
follow perfect circles, because such Platonic Forms were more exalted and
therefore were proper concepts for the description of the cosmos. Yet, perfect
circles hopelessly complicated geo-centric models. Tycho Brahe's geo-centric
model&mdash;the model that Copernicus realized was pointlessly
convoluted&mdash;predicted the movements of heavenly bodies only with the aid of
epicycles, equants, and other mathematical devices that were designed (somewhat
ironically, as it turns out) to accommodate the many deviations from perfect
circle orbits postulated in the model. (Think of an epicycle as a smaller hoop
affixed to a larger hoop, so that deviations from traversing the larger hoop can
be explained by placing the traversing object somewhere on the smaller hoops
orbit.) Yet even with the addition of such fudge-factors in Brahe's geocentric
model, limits to the prediction of celestial motion were a commonplace. In
short, the models, though complicated, were also frustratingly inaccurate.

A heliocentric model was virtually unthinkable at the time of Copernicus,
however, as the Earth was imported a divinely special status&mdash;it was the
planet, after all, where Jesus had lived and where it was thought that the
Divine Plan of the entire universe was unfolding. This observation about the
barriers to doing science in the culture of the late Middle Ages in Europe,
under the cloak of Catholicism, as it were, has formed part of the story of the
Scientific Revolution ever since. And, more or less, it's correct. What's less
appreciated, however, is that Copernicus himself felt divinely inspired; his
religious views of the glory of the sun inspired or rther sustained his belief
that the sun must be the center of the cosmos. Only an object as glorified as
the sun could fill such a role. The Copernican Revolution then, the kick-off of
what came to be called the Scientific Revolution, was a triumph of religious
vision and fervor as much as empirical reality. 

Copernicus was right, of course. He needn't have held such elevated views of
the sun. He needn't necessarily have been infused with Greek neo-platonism or
other-worldly thoughts at all. His helio-centric model though carefully written
to avoid conflict with the Catholic Church, would chip at the monolithic
synthesis of religion and science under Scholasticism until a fissure formed,
deepened with Galileo, and eventually split the entire intellectual world open
with Newton. After Newton, religion was divorced from science, and science was
indeed liberated from the constraints of religious tenants and other
non-empirical world views. It was, indeed, a revolution.

But although early thinkers like Copernicus and even Newton were intoxicated
with visions of a cosmos full of wonder and deity and immaterial reality (Newton
once famously speculated that angels were partially responsible for gravitation,
which he claimed he only described mathematically, and had not explained in any
deeper sense), by the beginning of the 19th Century the flight from immaterial
conceptions of the universe was nearly complete. The philosopher and
mathematician Rene Descartes laid much of the groundwork for what would become
known as the "official" scientific worldview in the 19th Century: Scientific
Materialism. There never was a consensus about the metaphysical presuppositions
after the Scientific Revolution, but in practice the cultural and intellectual
consequences of the revolution were a profoundly materialistic underpinning for
Science, conceived now as a distinct and privileged activity apart from religion
or the humanities. Matter and energy was all that existed. And to provide a
conceptual framework for "matter and energy" was Descartes' life work.

Descartes himself was a theist, and the Cartesian conception of reality is known
as Substance Dualism: there are two basic substances, matter (or matter and
energy), and an immaterial substance conceived of as mind or soul. Everything
fits into one of these two categories in the Cartesian framework. Before, the
"material world" was not separable from a mental realm completely. []

Galileo's focus on primary properties like quantity, mass, and so on. The other
secondary properties were relegated to the Immaterial Realm. Descartes would
later attempt to prove, famously, that as God must exist (his "cogito, ergo
sum") because the idea of God could not be doubted (and God would not deceive
us), that therefore the human mind existed apart from the material world. In
practice, however, as science achieved impressive and ever growing mastery of
knowledge about the world, the Immaterial Realm became less and less important,
and implausible. What we couldn't explain scientifically would end up in the
immaterial realm. But the progress of science seemed to suggest that such a
strategy was a mere placeholder, for as the consequences of the Scientific
Revolution were fully felt, even something as sacrosanct as the human mind would
eventually yield to the march of science, and be explainable in purely material
terms. Hence, the original substantive division of body and mind &mdash;
material and immaterial &mdash; tended to collapse into a monistic materialism. 
Mind, it seemed, was a mere fiction, much like religious notions about the
cosmos turned out to be after Copernicus. 

Yet, once one half of the Cartesian framework is removed, the remaining Material
Realm is relatively simplistic. Whereas Aristotle and Greek thinking generally
postulated secondary qualities like tastes and smells and colors as part of the
purely physical world, along with rich conceptual structures like forms, the
Caresian materialist framework was minimalist, and consisted only in a void full
of atoms&mdash;uncuttables&mdash; and the mathematics necessary to measure and
count and explain the movements of these particles. The universe in the
Cartesian framework was suddenly dry, and simple, and, well, bleak. Hence what
began as a full throated metaphysical dualism capable of sustaining a belief in
an infinite Deity ended in a simple view of materialism amenable to doing
science as it was done by the great minds of the Revolution. Mathematics, and
matter, and all else was fiction.

By the nineteenth century, then, the philosopher and scientist Simon-Pierre
Laplace could proclaim that "he had no need of that hypothesis" when confronted
with questions about how God fit into science. Science, which began in a
maelstrom of broad and speculative metaphysics, in grand, exalted concepts of
things had in the span of a hundred years adopted not only a distinct and often
hostile stance opposite of Western religion (and in particular the
Judeo-Christian tradition), but had eschewed the "mind" or immaterial half of
the Cartesian framework, adopting the other, minimalist, half instead. 

Yet, Cartesian materialism has proven remarkably fruitful over the years. If we
think of the universe as simply matter and energy, and go about observing it,
formulating hypotheses expressible in mathematics, and confirming these
hypotheses with experiments (ideally), we end up with modern science. 

Are there any limits to scientific enquiry? Yes, and in fact the actual
practice of science exposes limits seemingly as much (or as significantly)

What Copernicus, Galileo, Newton, and the other heroes of the Scientific
Revolution gave us were Progressive Theories&mdash;pieces of knowledge about the
physical world that showed us, in a postive way how things went, and how we
could explain them. 

[bridge into discussion of limits]

The Puzzle of Limits

In a trivial sense, scientific knowledge about the physical world is always
limiting. The inverse square law specifies the force of gravity in Newtonian
mechanics: for two objects the gravitational force between them is inversely
proportional to the square of their distance. This is a limit in a trivial
sense because gravity can't now be described using some other equation (or any
equation); it's not, for instance, inversely proportional to the triple of their
distance. But nothing really turns on this notion of limits, and indeed the
very point of science is to find actual laws that govern the behavior of the
world, and these laws will have some definite mathematical description or other.
 When we say that pressure is related to volume in Boyle's Law, for instance, we
don't feel we have a _law_ until we've expressed the relationship to gas
pressure and volume as a specific equation, which necessarily precludes other,
different, equations. All of this is to say we can dispense with the trivial
notion of limits.

What's more interesting are cases where scientific investigation reveals
fundamental limits to our knowledge of certain phenomena in the world. Like
with the Newton's Inverse Square Law or Boyle's Law for gases, we've isolated a
physical systems and described it's causal or law-like behavior in mathematical
terms (algebraic equations in the two examples), but once we have this correct
account, it turns out that there are inherent limitations to how we can use this
knowledge to further explain or predict events or outcomes in the system. The
system itself, one might say, once correctly described in the language of
science, has characteristics that prevent us from knowing what we wish to know
about it, or using the knowledge we do have in certain desired ways.

The first major limiting result in this non-trivial sense probably came from
Maxwell's work in thermodynamics in the 19th century. Entropy, as it came to be
known, is perhaps the ultimate limiting result. 

[]

The 19th Century had other surprises, Henri Poincare, the great French
mathematician, proved that the famous "Three Body Problem" was unsolvable, and
in so doing anticipated much of the modern field of Chaos Theory. The Three
Body Problem states that ...

By comparison to the 20th Century, however, limiting results emerging from work
in the 19th Century have been tame. Two major 20th Century advances&mdash;one
in physics and the other in mathematics&mdash;have ushered in sea changes to
modern science that have greatly altered our Enlightenment notion of the nature
and limits of science. In physics, Heisenberg's Uncertainty Principle
demonstrated that at the quantum level, we can't isolate the position and
momentum of a particle simultaneously. To get arbitrary precision of a
particle's position, we necessarily change it's momentum, and likewise isolating
the momentum of a subatomic particle limits our ability to pinpoint its
position. The Uncertainty Principle thereby established that as scientific
investigation turns to the "really small", or subatomic scale of the universe,
there are boundaries to our knowledge of physics. It's important to note here
that the Uncertainty Principle is not provisional, a result based on current
limits to technology or to the state of physics in the early 20th century. 
Rather, it's a valid result in general; it holds for any measurement of
subatomic phenomena, anywhere, at any time. It's a fundamental limit that we've
discovered about the nature of our world, when we turn our investigation to
subatomic scales. 

Yet, for all the humbling implications of Heisenberg's principle, it helped
launch modern quantum mechanics. As is often the case, discovering what we
can't know ends up more fruitful for science than discoveries about what we can.
 Armed with the Uncertainty Principle, scientists were able to frame hypotheses
and investigations into the nature of quantum phenomena and further develop the
statistical framework of modern quantum mechanics. Indeed, the notion that
deterministic knowledge isn't fully possible in subatomic realm, and thus that a
statistical distribution of possible outcomes must be provided, is one of the
key insights of the new physics. Not knowing our limitations, the statistical
framework for quantum mechanics may not have fit into place so rapidly and
intuitively as it did in the last century. Again, limiting results in science
have proven art of the backbone of progress in science, however paradoxical this
may seem.

To wrap our minds around the significance of the productivity of limiting
results in science, we might employ some metaphors. Call the "limitless
progress" assumptions undergirding the Scientific Revolution and 19th century
scientific materialism (with Mach and others) Limitless Science. A metaphor for
Limitless Science will be something constructive, evoking the notion of
continual progress by building something. We might conceive of the results of
Limitless Science as a crisscrossing of roads and infrastructure on a smooth
round sphere (like the Earth, say, but without land marks like canyons or
mountains that obstruct road-building). To get to any location on the sphere of
Limitless Science, you simply plot out the distance, allow for conditions like
rain or say hills or sand or swamps, and lay out your roadway. Each time a road
is built, another location is accessible on the globe. Continue in this way and
eventually anyone can get anywhere on Limitless Science planet. (To avoid
having every square inch of the planet covered in roadways, we might stipulate
that places within a bike ride or a walk from some road don't need their own
roads.)

Beginning with the Second Law of Thermodynamics and moving through the 19th
century to Poincare's insight into the chaotic behavior of complex systems on up
through the 20th century we see that the limiting results stand in stark
contradistinction to Limitless Science. In fact, we'll need a different
metaphor to visualize scientific progress in this world. Our globe of
ever-increasingly roadways doesn't capture the fact that many times our inroads
to results end up in dead-ends. So, by contrast, Limiting-Discovery Science
isn't a pristine spherical object where any road (theory) can reach any
destination, but rather obstructions like a Grand Canyon or a raging river, or a
range of impassable mountains dot the landscape. Building roads on
Limiting-Discovery Planet is not a matter of plotting a straight line from a
beginning point to a destination, but rather in negotiating around obstructions
(limiting results) to get to final destinations. We can have fun with this
metaphor: if Heisenberg's Uncertainty Principle is a Grand Canyon to be
navigated around, then say the Second Law of Thermodynamics is the Himalayas,
and Chaos Theory is the Pacific. The point here is that scientific
investigation discovers these impassable landmarks and our knowledge of the
world then proceeds along roads we've engineered as detours in light of these
discoveries. And, to push the metaphor a bit, we find out things we can't
do&mdash;places we can't go&mdash;unlike our Limitless Science globe, with its
smooth, traversable surface. It's no use building a road through the Grand
Canyon, or over Mount Everest. The features of this world eliminate options we
thought we had, before the discoveries. Likewise, of course, with scientific
discovery itself.

To expland on this point a bit more, what's interesting about the metaphor is it
helps us see that, in a way, every truth we discovery about the world around us
is fruitful and progressive. Discovering the Grand Canyon is a landmark of the
Southwestern United States is only limiting if we'd assumed that our human
ambitions to build roads all over our world would never be frustrated, by "facts
on the ground" so to speak. But scientific investigation is in the end about
discovering truths, and these truths are fruitful even when limiting (when we
first assume perfect, linear progress) because knowing how the world really is,
is bound to be fruitful. If you can't, after all, drive across the Grand
Canyon, it's fruitful to know that fact. You can then build a system of roads
that skirts around it, and you're on your way. Similarly with scientific
discovery, when we realize we can't, for instance, isolate with arbitrary
precision the position and momentum of a subatomic particle simultaneously, this
knowledge about the observational limits of subatomic phenomena paves the way
for a formulation of quantum mechanics in terms of statistics and probability,
rather than causal laws that presuppose knowledge of impossibilities, and such
results generate successful predictions elsewhere, along with technological and
engineering innovations based on such results. We learn, in other words, what
we can do, when we discover what we can't. And so it is with science, just as
in other aspects of our lives.

This brings us to our next major point, which is that, unfortunately, scientific
materialists hold metaphysical assumptions about the nature of the world that
tend to force Limitless Science types of thinking about discovery. If the
entire universe is just matter and energy&mdash;if Physicalism is true, in other
words&mdash;then every impossibility result emerging from scientific
investigation is a kind of failure. Why? Because there's nothing mystical or
immaterial about the universe, anywhere, and so one naturall assumes the sense
of mystery and wonder will gradually give way as more and more physical
knowledge is accumulated. If Chaos Theory tells us that some physical systems
exhibit a sensitive dependence on initial conditions such that long-range
prediction of events in these systems is effectively impossible, this means only
that with our current differential techniques (say, Lavier-Stokes equations for
fluid dynamics) we have some limits in those types of systems. Since there's
nothing much going on but unpredictability from the properties of chaotic
systems, there's sure to be some advances in our ability to build roads that
will gradually whittle away the limitations here. And to the extent that this
isn't fully possible, it expresses only a fact about our limited brains, say, or
the limits of computation given the complexity of the world. 

To put all this another way, scientific materialists are committed to seeing
limiting results in science either as placeholders until better methods come
around, or as lacunae in our own noetic capabilities. You might say this is the
"we're too primitive" or "we're too stupid" response to limiting results. What
is manifestly not possible with a materialist presupposition is that the limits
point to real boundaries in our application of physical concepts to the world. 

Roughly, there are two two possibilities that materialists will ignore when
confronted with Grand Canyons or the Himalayas on Limiting-Discovery Planet. 
One, the Cartesian materialism presupposed in science since the Enlightenment
might be wrong or incomplete, so that some expanded framework for doing science
is necessary. Two, there may be immaterial properties in the universe. In this
latter case, the reason we can't lay roadwork down through the parts of Arizona
that intersect with the Grand Canyon is simply because there's no physical
"stuff" there to work with; the Grand Canyon is a metaphor for something that is
not reducible to matter and energy. This is an entirely possible and even
reasonable response when contemplating the meaning of the limiting results
(i.e., we're up against a part of the universe that isn't purely material, which
is why material explanations fall short), but they won't be entertained
seriously by scientific materialists. Again, since all of the universe is just
assumed to be matter and energy (and we have historical, roughly Cartesian
accounts of matter and energy, to boot), limiting results will always end up as
commentary about humans-when-doing-science (that we're either too primitive
still to get it, or just too stupid, which is close to the same idea sans the
possibility of future progress).

But we can reign all this philosophical speculation in, for the moment (though
we'll have to return to it later). We've left out maybe the most interesting
limiting result not only of the last century, but perhaps ever. It's arguably
the most fruitful, as well, as its publication in 1931 led step by step to the
birth of modern computation. This is rather like discovering the Grand Canyon,
reflecting on it for a while, kicking around in the hot desert sands, and then
realizing a design for an airplane. The result is Godel's Incompleteness
Theorems. As its the sin qua non of our thesis&mdash;limiting results resulting
in fruitful scientific research&mdash;we'll turn to it in some detail next.

[Godel's Theorem, Halting Problem, modern computation, computational complexity
versus undecideability, AI]

AI-A Giant Limiting Result

Yet, the lessons of science seem lost on the Digital Singularity crowd. The
apposite metaphor here is in fact the one we rejected in the context of actual
science&mdash;Limitless Science Planet. Everything is onward and upward, with
progress, progress, progress. Indeed futurists and AI enthusiast Ray Kurzweil
insists that the lesson of the last few hundred years of human society is that
technological innovation is not only increasingly but exponentially increasing. 
Such a nose thumbing take on intellectual culture (including scientific
discovery, of course, which drives technological innovation) excludes any real
role for limiting results, and suggests instead the smooth, transparent globe of
Limitless Science. Indeed, as we build roads we become more and more capable of
building better roads more quickly. In such a rapidly transfiguring scenario,
it's no wonder that Kurzweil and other Digital Singularity types expect
Artificial Intelligence to "emerge" from scientific and technological progress
in a few years time. It's assumed&mdash;without argument&mdash;that there are
no Grand Canyons, or Mount Everests, or Pacific Oceans to fret about, and so
there's nothing theoretical or in principle that prevents
computation&mdash;networks of computers, say&mdash;from coming alive into a
super intelligence in the near future (we get the "near" part of "near future"
from the observation that technological innovation is exponentially increasing).
 This is Limitless Science at its finest.

But, in general, we've seen that Limitless Science isn't true. In fact, there
are lots of features of the actual world that the accretion of scientific
knowledge uncovers to be limiting. And indeed, the history of science is
replete with examples of such limiting results bearing scientific and
technological fruit. The actual world we discover using science, in other
words, is vastly different than Digital Singularitists assume. It's time now to
return to the question of whether (a) an expanded framework for science or (b)
an actual boundary to materialism in science is required. But to do this, we'll
need to tackle one final limiting result, the problem of consciousness.