---
layout: post
title: "Kurzweil's Confusion"
date: 2014-02-05
categories: 
---

The real mystery about intelligence is how the human brain manages to do so
much, with so little. As Kurzweil himself notes, the human brain "uses a very
inefficient electrochemical, digital-controlled analog computational process. 
The bulk of its calculations are carried out in the interneuronal connections at
a speed of only about two hundred calculations per second ((in each connection),
which is at least one million times slower than contemporary electronic
circuits."

Kurzweil is making a case for the mystery of human intelligence. Whenever the
human brain, when viewed as a computational device, comes up so short, what
needs to be explained then is how our vast superiority intelligent thinking is
possible. The more a purely computational comparison shows brains as inferior
to computation, the more computation itself seems a poor model for intelligence.
 

When supercomputers like Crey's Jaguar achieve petaFLOP performance (a million
billion floating point operations per second), and we still can't point to
anything intuitive or insightful or human-like that they can do (like understand
natural language), it suggests pretty strongly that brute computational power is
not a good measure of intelligence. In fact, Kurzweil himself makes this point
pretty well, though of course it's not his intent. To put it another way, when
everything is computational speed, and humans lose the game, then true
intelligence is clearly not computational speed.

To put it yet another way, the slower and crappier our "architecture" is when
viewed as a glorified computer, the more impressive our actual intelligence
is&mdash;and of course, the more the very notion of "intelligence" is manifestly
not analyzable by computational means.

So much for Moore's Law leading us to Artificial Intelligence. Next thought?