---
layout: post
title: "Limits - Thoughts"
date: 2014-02-02
categories: 
---

Copernicus as a model for exalted view of personhood along with an expanded
metaphysics including mind as well as divinity.

Enlightenment saw a contraction of metaphysics but continued an exalted view of
personhood, exemplified in the Renaissance man or a humanism that placed man at
the center of the cosmos and man's innovativeness and mental powers as
paramount.

Slowly, the consequences of the Cartesian Minimalist Materialism eroded the
Enlightenment Humanism, just as the break from Catholicism in the Scientific
Revolution eroded the Judeo-Christian worldview. (or: Theistic).

By the 20th century, scientific investigation had uncovered a world full of
limits, boundaries, and outright mysteries. On the one hand, the major
framework for modern physics was in place.Yet, on the other, it was clear that
limiting results formed a huge part of the overall picture of science. In some
cases, these results simply circumscribed the limits of human knowledge and
capabilities. Yet in others, they seemed to suggest that the very naturalistic
framework that western science had embraced&mdash;the Cartesian Minimalist
Materialism&mdash;was perhaps inadequate to fully explain the mysteries of the
natural world, mysteries that scientific investigation itself had exposed.

The human mind seemed to be uncovering evidence in the natural world of its own
limitations. Add to this, a major naturalistic theory of intelligence or
consciousness remained elusive by the end of the twentieth century.

Yet limitations discovered in the minimalist materialist framework continually
erode the notion of the uniqueness of humans. Rather than suggest that
boundaries and limitations to naturalistic explanations suggest an expanded
scientific framework&mdash;incorporating humanist elements like human
intelligence and consciousness (mind), a return to the exalted view of humanity
in the world, such boundaries and limitations seem to frustrate the scientific
enterprise and encourage more and more desperate attempts to maintain a strict
adherence to naturalism in spire of mounting evidence. 

As this tension hit a boiling point, a most unlikely successor to science has
come into play. That is, digital technology and its success in ideas such as
Moore's Law has spawned a new, expanded metaphysics. Unfortunately,
computationalism continues the deflationary trend against humanism, replacing
the innovativeness of persons with either crowds or machines. Nothing is less
valued in the modern Computationalist paradigm than the human person, viewed as
an individual. Classic philosophic conundrums like consciousness are now
"solved" by emerging out of computation (big data, networks, faster and faster
computers), as well as intelligence (now a "super intelligence" rivaling human
intelligence). There is even traditional religious notions smuggled back into
the metaphysical discussion. 

Hence, we've come full circle, since Copernicus. Only, now, a universe with
greater meaning is emerging from our own creation&mdash;our
technology&mdash;which will one day be greater and more valuable than ourselves.