---
layout: post
title: "Rapture for the Geeks"
date: 2014-04-04
categories: science.ai
---

A bit dated, but here's an excellent article on the links between [checking
your fav mobile device and
addiction](http://www.nytimes.com/2007/04/22/weekinreview/22richtel.html?_r=0) .
 Speaking of dated, here's a NYT article going all the way back to 2000 on the
connection between c [omputer networks and biological
systems](http://www.nytimes.com/2007/04/22/weekinreview/22richtel.html?_r=0) 
(both evolving, as it were). I found these references in the chapter notes of a
quirky but eminently readable little book called [Rapture for the
Geeks](http://www.amazon.com/Rapture-Geeks-When-AI-Outsmarts/dp/0307405265) , by
Richard Dooling. The subtitle is "When AI Outsmarts IQ" and its a
semi-tongue-in-cheek look at Strong AI and visions of the future like the
Singularity.

On the first article, you can Google "mobile phones and addiction" or what have
you and get the gist. Most of the discussion is wink-and-nod; I'm sure there
are some serious studies out there. The Huff Post talks about it 
[here](http://www.huffingtonpost.com/karen-s-exkorn/put-your-cellphone-in-the_b_4296538.html)
. Whether compulsively checking or paying attention to your mobile is an
"addiction" inherits all the baggage of talking about "addiction", but it's
clear enough these days that many of us would be happier if we engaged in that
sort of behavior less often. 

On the second article, it seems there's a general, somewhat ill-defined notion
out there that computational networks are evolving, and similarly (in some
sense) to biological networks. Or, rather, that the concept of evolution of
complex systems is general enough to include technological evolution (of which
the digital technology and especially the Internet is a subset). This is a
beguiling notion when viewed from afar, but when you zoom in on it, hoping for
clarity, it's tough to determine the meat and potatoes of it all. _How_ is
this system evolving like _that_ one? one is tempted to ask. Or rather, if
"evolution" is generic, what does it cover, then? What doesn't evolve? To
nutshell all of this, say it thusly: in what interesting, non-trivial, sense is
technology evolving like we think biological species have (and are)? 

Naturally skeptical of all the geek-rapture about smart machines, my hunch is
that there's no real there there. Technology is simply getting&mdash;well,
we're getting more and more of it, and it's more and more connected. And that's
about all there is to the idea, when you analyze it with something like a
thoughtful and healthy skepticism. Nothing wrong with that; we could use more
of it these days, it seems.

On the book, I dunno. Read it if you're interested in the whole question of
whether machines are becoming intelligent like humans.