---
layout: post
title: "Project Outline"
date: 2007-09-30
categories: 
---

Introduction: We're at another moment, alas 

There are moments in history; events that change the entire course of things.
They are hard to predict, and they may even be small, taken by themselves. They
may be recognizable as such right away, or they may reveal themselves completely
only in retrospect. But nonetheless, they are inescapable. The assasination of
Archduke Franz Ferdinand in 1914 was a moment&mdash;an event of tremendous
future significance that later plunged us into The Great War (after which the
old European world order was gone, a vacuum filled by new leaders and political
ideologies&mdash;among them Fascism, later Nazism). Just 25 years later,
Germany invaded Poland, the beginning of second world war in Europe. Another
moment. 

Historical moments tend to lead to comprehensive changes in human societies,
from changes in politics and policies to fuzzier changes in pop culture and
broad themes in intellectual culture. We get new "isms", like atheistic
existentialism in Paris, 1940s. Comprehensive changes in society happen after
moments beacause humans&mdash;like every other living thing&mdash;have to adapt
to continue to survive. We adapt, mainly, by thinking. Humans are constantly
trying to adapt to events that we cannot predict by rethinking and retooling our
ideas, beliefs, and values. 

Adapting to historical moments has become almost constantly necessary. The
world really seems unstable, viewed through the lens of the last hundred years. 
The Cold War was, in a sense, stability, but it was the wrong kind. When the
wall came down, we all realized the price of that awful stability, decades of
locking horns with the terrible other side. The adaption that began after the
Berlin Wall fell was accelerated by information technology: within a few years
the conceptual gap between _then_ (big clunky, pre Internet Soviet era _then_
) and some new, exciting word order was palpable. Thomas Friedman gave us "pop"
globalization, Clinton Free Trade, and the Internet something really big to
think about. And really progressive. The Gulf War was a blip after which
discussions of _possibilities_ defined the times. 

But we can't get away from these moments. Not a decade of relative peace, and a
world of possibilities exploded in the most fantastic way conceivable with the
fall of the towers in September 11, 2001. Instability everywhere. 

<div> 

What's interesting about our world today, however, is that we have very little
consensus on what 9/11 meant, and how we _ought to_ adapt now. It is perhaps
distinctive of these times that we have so many opinions informed by so much
information, and no consensus. We speak a common language&mdash;I understand
what you are saying&mdash;but we have no shared vocabulary for evaluating
competing claims and hence reaching consensus. (Watch the "news" talk shows and
understand this point exactly: just add volume and hope for the best.) </div> 

The danger, then, is not just in the temporary problems that occupy political
discourse&mdash;who's in office this year, when we pull out of Iraq, whether we
should raise the CAFE standards. The danger is that fundamentally we're not
problem solving very well anymore. There are, I argue, some very deep reasons
for this much worth exploring. Changing our conceptual landscape&mdash;or at
least shining some light on it&mdash;ought to get us going in more promising
directions. That's my hope in this book, if even I've shined only enough light
to get others talking on productive terms. I hope it helps. 

Part 1: Theory 

<ol> 

<li> <font size="4"> Of causes, statistics, and chaos </font> </li> </ol> 

<ul> 

<li> We can't tell where _something_ is going to be for certain (result of a
acting on b is in general not computable). Call this the Causal Model, or more
evocatively Laplace's Demon </li> 

<li> We can give a probability distribution for possible locations given known
initial conditions. Call this the Statistical Model </li> 

<li> Some systems are too complex to predict given even the Statistical Model.
We instead use a weaker model: we describe the properties of the system. Take
weather, a textbook example of a turbulent system. These types of systems earned
their own name a few decades ago as chaotic systems. We can describe chaotic
systems mathematically, but in general we have a horizon of prediction beyond
which we simply can't tell (compare to Haley's comet). We can call these weakly
predictive, primarily descriptive models Chaos Models. </li> </ul> 

<p> <font size="4"> The Mechanistic Model </font> </p> 

<p> History (Newton) </p> 

<p> Laplace, Civil War era thinkers </p> 

<p> Success of statistics, new way of viewing things (from Plato's essences,
Agassiz to Darwin). Anecdote about the Pierces. </p> 

<p> Quantum Mechanics - Shrodinger's Cat </p> 

<p> Penrose's suggestion that the world is not deterministic - Godel's Argument
</p> 

<p> <font size="4"> The Statistical Model </font> </p> 

<p> But whether the world is, at root, completely deterministic, so that in
principle we could predict every state of the world at every instant of time,
hardly matters to us today. Supercomputers can't tell us whether it will be
overcast or sunny on Monday, when we're planning the big vacation Saturday. Our
predictive capacities in the physical world are limited, an observation that is
of course consistent with both the Laplacian view and the "New Physics" as
quantum mechanics has been coined. </p> 

<p> But we do of course use models of the world for prediction. I've spent years
building NLP systems that learn predictive models from annotated data (so called
"supervised" learning techniques where there is a gold standard of correct
examples available to the learning algorithm). When running such systems on
unseen data (new text that the learning did not see), we expect with even
successful implementations some error. Error is part of engineering. Practically
speaking, our scientific interactions with the physical world are exersizes in
minimizing error. But error is always there. </p> 

<p> Good predictive models have acceptable error. Examples. </p> 

<p> So, we give a 70% of showers. When hurricanes are about to make land,
computer models, show multiple projected paths, with some more probable (given
the model) than others. Mean time to failure informs vehicle manufacturers when
parts are likely to fail. Recommendation systems for credit card fraud tell us
whether a credit event is fraud subject to some threshold. It could be wrong.
</p> 

<p> The fact that things break, systems fail, and we all make mistakes is a coin
flip observation that things come out as planned, features of the world now give
us predictive information about possible feature later. The success of science
is mostly a commentary on the success of the Statistical Model. </p> 

<p> Turbulence up ahead - The Chaos Model </p> 

<p> The publication of Chaos in 1987 introduced the world to nonlinear systems,
what makes the world interesting, fantastically complicated, and yes, difficult
to predict. Chaos means that predicting the future will continue to be the stuff
of science fiction and magicians. </p> 

<p> One of the things about chaos is that small changes in intial conditions can
lead, over time, to very large changes in the state of a system. The buildings
that fell on 9/11 weren't really large targets, judged by, say, fire bombings in
Dresden or Nagasaki, or the combined structures hit with missles in Baghdad, to
take just a few examples. But the significance of those buildings&mdash;the
geopolitical conditions that existed then&mdash;entered into the intentional
world as objects whose destruction by terrorists was of massive
significance&mdash;the tidal wave set forth from this physical event in the
intentional world resulted in two wars&mdash;both still ongoing years later, and
scores of other changes to the fabric of society well documented in the press
(the Patriot Act, for one). </p> 

<p> Minds are the ultimate nonlinear system </p> 

<p> Penrose (deterministic?) </p> 

<p> All of this is rather depressing, actually, when viewed as commentary on the
prospects for figuring out what to do next given the very obvious geopolitical
instability we witness now nearly everyday. It suggests, of course, that a
global system of symbols and facts such as we constitute on our planet is (will
continue to be) very resistant to scientific prediction. We literally can't see
around the corner with any certainty at all. </p> 

<ol> 

<li> <font size="4"> </font> </li> 

<li> <font size="4"> Of Plans and Tolstoy </font> </li> </ol> 

<p> It was predictable that the U.S. would "win", but what about the rest? </p> 

<p> What is the best plan relative to some context C (where C contains the best
attempt at gathering relevant facts)? </p> 

<p> Conclusion: Some predictions are obvious because the initial conditions and
final conditions are "tightly coupled". 737s after passing adequate safety
inspections, without too many miles, having a good service record, tend not to
crash. Even, as Laurence Gonzalez notes about their structure in Deep Survival,
given that they have crash potential, nonetheless we predict safe flights all of
the time. There is a tight coupling between a conflict whose contestants and
their skills are known and objectively comparable. That's why we could predict a
quick initial military victory in Iraq. But, let the coupling between prior and
subsequent events loosen&mdash;for instance, by keeping the American military on
the ground after the initial conflict, allowing thousands and thousands of
chaotic interactions, decisions, unplanned events to occur, and suddenly it is
almost impossible to tell how it will end. We are swamped in chaos. </p> 

<p> We might say, then, that we have a horizon of predictability with regard to
both the physical and intentional worlds. What exactly is in side our
horizon&mdash;what we can reasonably predict given what we know&mdash;is of
course a question of supreme importance to us all. More generally, within our
horizon lies our abilities to assess courses of action given initial conditions.
In the realm of people "initial conditions" are our traditions, values, and
knowledge about each other and the world. What is interesting about people is
that they can make changes in the system "from within", as it were. Bad
ideas&mdash;ones that lead to unwanted outcomes&mdash;tend to be replaced with
more efficacious ideas and world views over time. We can change the initial
conditions. We can, in other words, improve our own view of the world by
writing, thinking, talking, and analyzing what is happening today, and how we
can make it better. </p> 

<p> 3. World Views </p> 

<p> Pragmatism and the Civil War </p> 

<p> The Cold War - welcome back absolutes </p> 

<p> Today - </p> 

<p> Sam Harris The End of Faith </p> 

<p> 4. What is necessary today? </p> 

<p> Ethics </p> 

<p> We can't stop arguing - why? </p> 

<p> MacIntyre's argument </p> 

<p> The Rationality of Eric Rodulf (or, something's wrong) </p> 

<p> Ethical Theory T - creating new initial conditions in the intentional world
- new ways of making sense of why we act </p> 

<p> Religion </p> 

<p> Purpose - what's it all about? nihilism in the modern age </p> 

<p> Putting to work the practical progressive mindset - creating different
conditions in the physical world </p> 

<p> 1. Stabilizing Iraq (getting in was "theory", getting out now is too),
Middle East </p> 

<p> 2. Competition: Energy independence </p> 

<p> 3. Openness to Globalization (nonzero games) </p> 

<p> </p>