---
layout: post
title: "Globalization and Oil"
date: 2007-10-01
categories: phoenix.globalization
---

Oil is screwing everything up. Set aside its role as the economic enabler of
terrorism. Oil prices are tied directly to transportation costs, and this is
tied directly to the success of the emerging global economy:

"On average," [reports the investment
bank](http://research.cibcwm.com/economic_public/download/occ_55.pdf"
target="_blank) CIBC World Markets, "a one percent increase in fuel prices
leads to a 0.4 percent increase in total freight rates." In terms of a potential
impact on world trade, say the authors of the report, Jeffrey Rubin and Benjamin
Tal, "the $30 per barrel increase in crude prices since late 2003 is equivalent
to an average tariff increase of 5 percentage points &mdash; more than doubling
the current average world tariff rate of 4.5 percent." (
[http://www.salon.com/tech/htww/2006/01/31/transport/index.html](http://www.salon.com/tech/htww/2006/01/31/transport/index.html)
)

This means that, in practical terms, our ability to liberalize trade and in
general to create global interdependencies (to play "nonzero games", as Wright
noted) is directly tied to oil prices. The global, high tech, new age economy
turns out to have a strange dependency on oil wells in Saudi Arabia. The Middle
East.

I'll argue elsewhere that we really, _really_ want, in general, three ideas to
take root (and to guide policy wherever suitable):

1. Stabilizing Iraq is in the first world's (indeed, _the_ world's) strategic
interest, even if it means ongoing military involvement by America and other
nations.

2. Developing renewable energy technologies capable of replacing petroleum
sources is at least as important as the push to develop the Atomic Bomb was in
the 1940s, or something like the development of a nuclear missile shield is
today. We ought to harness the best in us and announce a project to deliver
these technologies to the world.

3. Continued trade liberalization and globalization will create "win win"
interactions among nations states that will, over time, result in more
prosperity and less geopolitical tensions. Globalizaton is a tool that we must
use to build prosperity. Explicating that idea and communicating it to the
public and to policy makers and business leaders is a top priority.

These ideas are all tied together, and they sit atop a theoretical landscape
that must itself be explained more fully (elsewhere). The people to carry this
message I call "practical progressives". These people will save the world. We
ought to know who they are, and what they think (and will need to think), to
usher in a new and better world.

Erik