---
layout: post
title: "Oh, Right, I Have a Blog"
date: 2011-09-12
categories: misc
---

I've been away on an extended hiatus as CEO of a software startup, which is
still ongoing, but I just can't stay away from blogging any longer. I picked up
a copy of the NYT times this morning at the Starbucks, which is proof positive
that I'm missing the ole' blogging world. 

So, I'll start out modestly with a phenomenon that I'm sure we're all familiar
with, but is really kind of silly if one stops to consider... 

The Token Door Shove... (dramatic music starts now) 

This refers to the little polite "shove" we give the door as we're entering a
building and it's closing on the person entering behind us. The TDS is silly
because, more often than not, it makes zero difference to the life of the person
behind us; in some cases it might actually make things nominally worse, as just
opening the door afresh would be easier than attempting to coordinate the door
grab _post_ push. We just do this, of course, because it's a signal that we
recognize the person behind us, which in general is a good thing. But, again,
it's silly because it doesn't really matter. It masquerades as having some
positive benefit, when in fact it's pure theater (if it actually does help in
some particular case, great, but it's a knee jerk thing that we never figure in
the first place, which is The Point). How many other benign actions do we
engage in just to reassure those around us that we're polite members of
civilization? How about, the little purse of the lips we give to passersby? Do
you know the one? Ever so soft and reassuring, and completely useless, unless
it's midnight in a shady part of town, of course, where it might give evidence
that we're not in attack mode with, say, a rusty screwdriver concealed behind
our back (but what if it's just _facial expression subterfuge?_ ). But if
we're in the shady part of town, we wouldn't look at the passerby at all, would
we? So, again, we're hell bent on appearing polite to each other, whether we're
actually helpful to another, or not.