---
layout: post
title: "Coming to a Town Near You:  Singularitarians, Transhumanists, and Smart Robots"
date: 2013-05-08
categories: 
---

<span style="font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;"> If you're lucky
enough to work in a software start up in a bastion of innovation like Palo Alto,
you'll have a front row seat watching young 20 somethings with oodles of
technical talent writing tomorrow's killer apps, talking about the latest tech
news (everyone is in the know), and generally mapping out a techno vision of the
future. It's exciting stuff. Walk down University Ave and take it all in; it
doesn't matter much which bistro or restaurant you wander into, you'll hear the
same excited patter of future talk&mdash;the next "New New Thing" as writer
Michael Lewis put it. The techno-ethos of Palo Alto is of course
understandable, as hundreds of millions in venture capital flow into start ups
each year, making millionaires of kids barely out of school, and changing the
nature of business and everyday life for the rest of us. It's an exciting
place. Yet, for all the benefits and sheer exhilaration of innovation, if you
stick around long enough, you'll catch some oddly serious discussions about
seemingly sillier topics. While there are plenty of sceptics and agnostics,
lots of technical types are drawn to "Sci Fi" versions of the future. And some
of them, for whatever reason, seem to think they can predict it. </span> 

<span style="font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;"> 

</span> <span style="font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;"> What's next,
"big picture"? Ask Google's founders, to take a notable example. In a 2004
Newsweek interview, Sergei Brin ruminated: </span> 

<span style="color: #333333; line-height: 21px;"> <span style="font-family:
Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;"> 

</span> </span> <span style="line-height: 21px;"> <span style="font-family:
Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;"> "I think we're pretty far along compared to 10
years ago," he says. "At the same time, where can you go? Certainly if you had
all the world's information directly attached to your brain, or an artificial
brain that was smarter than your brain, you'd be better off. Between that and
today, there's plenty of space to cover." </span> </span> 

<span style="line-height: 21px;"> <span style="font-family: Arial, Helvetica,
sans-serif;"> 

</span> </span> <span style="font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;"> 
<span style="line-height: 21px;"> And it's not just Brin. Google technology
director Craig Silverstone chimed in (in the same article): </span> <span
style="color: #333333; line-height: 21px;"> "The ultimate goal is to have a
computer that has the kind of semantic knowledge that a reference librarian
has". </span> </span> 

<span style="color: #333333; line-height: 21px;"> <span style="font-family:
Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;"> 

</span> </span> <span style="color: #333333; line-height: 21px;"> <span
style="font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;"> Really? From the Google
intelligencia, no less. But this is part of the culture in Silicon Valley, and
all over the world, it's the engineers, computer scientists, and entrepreneurs
who seem obsessed with the idea of reverse engineering our brains to create
artificial versions. If you're an engineer immersed in the project of making
better, "smarter" software all day, it's an understandable vision, even noble,
by "geek" standards. But cerebral types have been trumpeting the imminent
arrival of Artificial Intelligence for decades, almost since Alan Turing gave us
the original theoretical spec for a universal computing machine, in 1936. 
</span> </span> 

<span style="font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;"> 

</span> <span style="color: #333333; font-family: Arial, Helvetica,
sans-serif;"> <span style="line-height: 21px;"> Well, as a member of the "geek
squad" myself, I've been following the debates for years, since back in graduate
school at Texas and Arizona, where debates about the nature of the human mind,
and the differences between humans and machines are a commonplace. Not much has
changed&mdash;fundamentally&mdash;since those years (as far as I can tell), and
the question of whether a machine can reproduce a mind is still largely
unanswered. But the world of technology has changed, quite radically, with the
development and widespread adoption of the Web. Perhaps our software isn't
"human smart", but impressive technology is everywhere these days, and it seems
to grow further and further into every corner of our lives, almost daily. The
notion, then, that our minds might end up in silicon-based systems is perhaps
not that impossibly far fetched. </span> </span> 

<span style="color: #333333; font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;"> <span
style="line-height: 21px;"> 

</span> </span> <span style="color: #333333; font-family: Arial, Helvetica,
sans-serif;"> <span style="line-height: 21px;"> In fact the explosion of Web
technology is probably most to credit (or blame) for the latest version of a Sci
Fi future. If you dare browse through all the "isms" that have sprung up out of
this cornucopia of digitization, you'll likely find yourself wishing Lonely
Planet published a tourists guide for would-be futurists. Failing that, let's
take a look at a Cliff Notes version, next. </span> </span> 

<span style="color: #333333; font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;"> <span
style="line-height: 21px;"> <b> The Isms </b> </span> </span> 

<span style="color: #333333; font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;"> <span
style="line-height: 21px;"> 

</span> </span> <span style="color: #333333; font-family: Arial, Helvetica,
sans-serif;"> <span style="line-height: 21px;"> As far as I can tell, there are
three main tenets to the Sci Fi Future involving superintelligent, artificial
beings. One, we have Singularitarianism (no this isn't misspelled). 
Entrepreneurs like Ray Kurzweil have popularized the neologism, in books like
The Age of Spiritual Machines (1999), The Singularity is Near (2005), and the
most recent How to Create a Mind: The Secrets of Human Thought Revealed (2011). 
The "singularity" as the name suggests, is the future point at which human or
biological and machine or non-biological intelligence merges, creating a super
intelligence that is no longer constrained by the limits of our physical bodies.
 At "the singularity", we can download our brains onto a better hardware, and
create a future world where we never have to get old and die, or get injured (we
can have titanium bodies). Plus, we'll be super smart, just like Brin suggests.
 When we need some information about something, we'll just, well, "think", and
the information will come to our computer-enhanced brains. </span> </span> 

<span style="color: #333333; font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;"> <span
style="line-height: 21px;"> 

</span> </span> <span style="color: #333333; font-family: Arial, Helvetica,
sans-serif;"> <span style="line-height: 21px;"> If this sounds incredible,
you're not alone. But Singularitarians insist that the intelligence of
computers is increasingly exponentially, and that as highfalutin as this vision
might seem, the laws of exponential growth make it not only plausible but
imminent. Kurzweil famously predicted that the "s-spot", the 
singularity&mdash;where machines outstrip the intelligence of humans&mdash;would
occur by 2029 in his earlier works; by 2005 he had revised this to 2045. Right
up ahead. (His predictions are predictably precise; understandably, they also
tend to get revised to more distant futures as reality marches on.) And
Carnegie Mellon robotics expert Hanz Moravec agrees, citing evidence from
Moore's Law&mdash;the generally accepted observation that computing capacity on
integrated circuits is doubling roughly every eighteen months&mdash;that a
coming "mind fire" will replace human intelligence with a "superintelligence"
vastly outstripping mere mortals. Moravec's prediction? Eerily on par with
Kurzweil, in his 1998 Robot: Mere Machine to Transcendent Mind, he sees
machines achieving human levels of intelligence by 2040, and surpassing our
biologically flawed hardware and software by 2050. </span> </span> 

<span style="color: #333333; font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;"> <span
style="line-height: 21px;"> 

</span> </span> <span style="color: #333333; font-family: Arial, Helvetica,
sans-serif;"> <span style="line-height: 21px;"> Well, if all of this
singularity talk creeps you out, don't worry. There are tamer visions of the
future from the geek squad, like transhumanism. Transhumanists (many of whom
share the millennial raptures of Singularitarians) seek an extension of our
current cognitive powers by the fusion of machine and human intelligence. 
Smarter human brains, from the development of smart drugs, artificial brain
implants for enhanced memory or cognitive functions, and even
"nanobots"&mdash;microscopic robots let loose in our brains to map out and
enhance our neural activities&mdash;promise to evolve our species from the
boring, latte drinking Humans 1.0 to the 2.0 machine-fused versions, where, as
Brin suggests, we can "have the world's information attached to our brains." 
(Sweet!) </span> </span> 

<span style="color: #333333; font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;"> <span
style="line-height: 21px;"> 

</span> </span> <span style="color: #333333; font-family: Arial, Helvetica,
sans-serif;"> <span style="line-height: 21px;"> <b> Enter True AI </b> 
</span> </span> 

<span style="color: #333333; font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;"> <span
style="line-height: 21px;"> 

</span> </span> <span style="color: #333333; line-height: 21px;"> <span
style="font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;"> Singularitarians. 
Transhumanists. They're all all bearish on mere humanity, it seems. But
there's another common thread besides the disdain for mere flesh and blood ,
which makes the futurists' "isms" distinctions one without a substantive
difference, because whether your transhuman future includes a singularity, or a
mere perpetual, incremental enhancement (which, arguably, we've been doing with
our technology since pre-history), you're into Artificial Intelligence, smart
robots. </span> </span> 

<span style="color: #333333; font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;"> <span
style="line-height: 21px;"> 

</span> </span> <span style="color: #333333; font-family: Arial, Helvetica,
sans-serif;"> <span style="line-height: 21px;"> After all, who would fuse
themselves with a shovel, or a toaster? It's the promise of artificial
intelligence that infuses techno-futurists prognostications with hope for
tomorrow. And while the history of AI suggests deeper and thornier issues
beguile the engineering of truly intelligent machines, the exponential explosion
of computing power and speed, along with the miniaturization of nearly
everything, make the world of smart robots seem plausible (again), at least to
the "isms" crowd. As co-founder of Wired magazine and techno-futurist Kevin
Kelly remarks in his 2010 What Technology Wants, we are witnessing the
"intelligenization" of nearly everything. Everywhere we look "smart
technologies" are enhancing our driving experiences, our ability to navigate
with GPS, to find what we want, to shop, bank, socialize, you name it. 
Computers are embedded in our clothing now, or in our eye wear (you can wear a
prototype version of the computer-embedded Google Glass these days, if you're
one of the select few chosen). Intelligenization, everywhere. </span> </span> 

<span style="color: #333333; font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;"> <span
style="line-height: 21px;"> 

</span> </span> <span style="color: #333333; line-height: 21px;"> <span
style="font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;"> Or, not. Computers are
getting faster and more useful, no doubt, but are they really getting smarter,
like humans? That's a question for neuroscience, to which we now turn. </span> 
</span> 

<span style="color: #333333; font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;"> <span
style="line-height: 21px;"> 

</span> </span> <span style="color: #333333; font-family: Arial, Helvetica,
sans-serif;"> <span style="line-height: 21px;"> <b> The Verdict from
Neuroscience? Don't Ask </b> </span> </span> 

<span style="color: #333333; line-height: 21px;"> <span style="font-family:
Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;"> </span> </span> 

<span style="font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;"> <span style="color:
#333333;"> <span style="line-height: 21px;"> One peculiarity with the current
theorizing among the technology "nerds", focused as they are on the
possibilities of unlocking the neural "software" in our brains to use as
blueprints for machine smarts, is the rather lackluster or even hostile
reception their ideas receive from the people ostensibly most in the know about
"intelligence" and its prospects or challenges&mdash;the brain scientists. 
Scientists like Nobel laureate and director of the Neurosciences Institute in
San Diego Gerald Edelman, for example. Edelman is notably sceptical, almost
sarcastic, when he's asked questions about the prospects of reverse engineering
the brain in software systems. </span> <span style="line-height: 21px;"> "
</span> </span> <span style="line-height: 25px;"> This is a wonderful
project&mdash;that we're going to have a spiritual bar mitzvah in some galaxy,”
Edelman says of the singularity. "But it's a very unlikely idea.” Bummer. (In
California parlance: "dude, you're dragging us down"). </span> </span> 

<span style="line-height: 25px;"> <span style="font-family: Arial, Helvetica,
sans-serif;"> 

</span> </span> <span style="font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;"> 
<span style="line-height: 25px;"> And Edelman is not alone in voicing skepticism
of what sci fi writer Ken MacLeod calls "rapture for nerds". In fact, almost
in proportion to the enthusiasm among the "machine types"&mdash;the engineers
and entrepreneurs like Google's Brin, and countless others in the slick office
spaces adorning high tech places like Silicon Valley&mdash;the "brain types"
seem to pour cold water. Wolf Singer of the Max Planck Institute for Brain
Research in Frankfurt, Germany, is best known for his "oscillations" proposal,
where he theorizes that patterns in the firing of neurons are linked, perhaps,
to cognition. Singer's research inspired no less than Francis Crick, co
discoverer of DNA, and Caltech neuroscience star Kristof Koch to propose that
"40 hz occillations" play a central role in forming our conscious experiences. 
</span> </span> 

<span style="line-height: 25px;"> <span style="font-family: Arial, Helvetica,
sans-serif;"> 

</span> </span> <span style="font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;"> 
<span style="line-height: 25px;"> Yet, he's notably nonplussed about the
futurists' prognostications about artificial minds. As former Scientific
American writer John Horgan notes in his IEEE Spectrum article, The
Consciousness Conundrum: " </span> <span style="line-height: 25px;"> Given our
ignorance about the brain, Singer calls the idea of an imminent singularity
[achieving true AI] 'science fiction'." </span> <span style="line-height:
25px;"> Koch agrees. Comparing his work with Crick&mdash;decoding DNA&mdash;to
the project of understanding the "neural code" for purposes of engineering a
mind, he muses: </span> <span style="line-height: 25px;"> " </span> <span
style="line-height: 25px;"> It is very unlikely that the neural code will be
anything as simple and as universal as the genetic code.” What gives? </span> 
</span> 

<span style="line-height: 25px;"> <span style="font-family: Arial, Helvetica,
sans-serif;"> 

</span> </span> <span style="font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;"> It's
hard to say. As always, the future of predicting the future is uncertain. One
thing seems probable, however. The core mysteries of life, like conscious
experience and intelligence, will continue to beguile and humble us, with a
greater appreciation for its complexity and beauty. And, predictably, what has
been called "Level 1" technologies, or "shop floor" technologies that we employ
to achieve specific goals&mdash;like traveling from A to B quickly (an
airplane), or digging a ditch (a shovel) or searching millions of electronic web
pages (a search engine) will continue to get more powerful and complex. What is
less predictable it seems, is whether all these enhancement projects will
really unlock anything special, beyond the digitization of our everyday
experiences in zillions of gadgets and tools. Indeed, whether all these gadgets
and tools really _are_ getting "smarter" or just faster, smaller, and more
ubiquitous in our lives, is itself an open question, properly understood. In
the complicated connections between technologies and the broader social,
political, and cultural contexts within which they exist, almost any future
seems possible. As Allenby and Sarewitz note in their 2012 critique of
transhumanism, The Techno-Human Condition, the real world is always a struggle
to define values, and _contra_ the technology-centered types like Kurzweil or
Moravec, it gets more and more complicated, and harder&mdash;not easier&mdash;to
predict. Technology, in other words, makes things murkier for futurists. And
real science&mdash;real _thinking_ &mdash;, ideally, can provide some balance. 
We'll see. </span> 

<span style="font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;"> 

</span> <span style="font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;"> Back in
Silicon Valley, things don't seem so philosophically confusing. The future, as
always, seems perpetually wide open to _more_ and _better_ , which
lockstep-like seems also certain to equal better outcomes for us, too. But the
sobering news, as the frontiers of neuroscience report, is that the "big
questions" are unanswered still today, and answering them seems a long way away
to boot. I'm not a betting person, but however the world appears in 2045 (or
was it 2029?), it's safe to say we don't know yet. In the meantime, the
all-too-human tendency to see nails everywhere with each new version of a hammer
is likely to continue, unabated. Well, so what? Perhaps the Google founders
and their legions of programmers have earned their right to prognosticate. We
humans can smile and shrug, and wait and see. We're all just human, after all.
</span> 

<span style="font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;"> 

</span>