---
layout: post
title: "Musings on The Information"
date: 2013-10-24
categories: 
---

The master distiller of science, James Gleick, gets me to thinking (not
necessarily in the direction he might intend).

Musing #1:

It's not really computation _simpliciter,_ but rather information that's got
the modern mind engaged and captivated and maybe _captured_ . Information's
the more fundamental notion. The problem for the physicalist is that
"information" requires big doses of mentalese&mdash;mind concepts, if not
mind-stuff&mdash;to get off the ground. You need decoding into meaning and
purpose and specification. You have highly abstract notions suddenly popping
out of their material substrate&mdash;"genes" are suddenly Platonic notions and
so on. All of this to get an abstraction up out of the brute matter&mdash;to
get information that is. Ask me, it's all mind. Or mind-related. Or mind
something. 

So it's a little silly to work with a naive materialism these days. I've long
suspected the knee-jerk disrespect to postulating purpose in nature (or, better,
observers, or minds) is a non-rational fear that we're sure to collapse back
into something pre-scientific unless we maintain a death grip on materialism. 
"Materialism is almost certainly false." This is a true statement. Scientific
investigation (I'm tempted to say "if one looks closely", but really it's not
that subtle) appears to me to be pointing away&mdash;walking away, you might
say&mdash;from brute materialism, even as, in a kind of misguided romantic
confusion, it thinks it's completing it. _The world is getting larger; we're
not completing something smaller._ 

And this is all I'm saying. What follows?