---
layout: post
title: "Whoops!  Idiocracy"
date: 2013-12-30
categories: 
---

In the last section, we surveyed the rise of search, focusing on (who else?)
Google, and saw how Google's insight about human judgments in HTML links
propelled Web search into the modern era. In this vein, then, we can see the
beginning of the entire social revolution (roughly, from Web 1.0 to Web 2.0 and
on) as a story of the beginning of "real" Web search with Google's PageRank
idea. Yet we ended this feel-good section back where we started, with all the
original worry about the Web making us stupid, a view given recent voice by
folks like Carr and Lanier, and even more recently with the latest The Atlantic
Cities article on the dangers of photo sharing; fretting now about our memories
and memory formation in the Instagram-age (always, alas, worried about our
brains online). What gives? This is our question.

Before answering it, though, it'll be helpful to review the general landscape
we've been traversing. Back to the beginning, then, we have:

(1) Increasingly, smart people are worrying about the downside of modern
technological culture (basically, "Web culture"). Indeed, studies now emerging
from cognitive psychology and neuroscience suggest that there's a real, actual
threat to our cognitive selves on the Web (our brains and brain activities like
memory, attention, and learning).

(2) As a corollary of (1), the picayune dream of something like
instrumentalism&mdash;we use a technology as we wish, and it doesn't really
change us in the process&mdash;is almost certainly false with respect to Web
culture.

(3) From (1) and (2), the Web seems to be changing us, and not entirely (or
even _mostly_ , depending on how moody one is) for the better.

(4) But the Web seems like the very paragon of progress, and indeed, we've been
at pains in the last section to explain how the Web (or Web search with Google)
is really all about people. It's all about people-smarts, we've argued, and so
how can something about _us_ turn out to be bad for us? Isn't the "Web"
really just our own, ingenious way of compiling and making searchable and
accessible all the content we think and write and communicate about, anyway?

(5) And so, from (1)-(4), we get our question: _what gives_ ?

That's our summary, then. And now we're in a position to address (5), or at
least we've got enough of a review of the terrain to have a fresh go at it now. 
To begin, let's make some more distinctions.

More Distinctions (or, Three Ways the Web Might be Bad). These are general
points about Web culture, and we might classify them roughly as (1) Bad Medium
(2) Distracting Environment, and (3) Trivial Content.

(1) Bad Medium

For years, people have noted in anecdotes and general hunches or preferences the
differences between physical books and electronic Web pages. Back in 2000, for
instance, in the halcyon days of the Web, noted researchers like John Seeley
Brown (who admittedly worked for Zerox) and Paul Diguid argued in The Social
Life of Information that "learning" experiences from printed material seem to be
of a qualitatively different sort then "learning" experiences we get from
reading lighted bits on an artificial screen. Books, somehow, are more
immersive; we tend to engage a book, where we're tempted reading text on a Web
page to skim, instead. We might call this an umbrella objection to taking the
Web too seriously, right from the get go, and I think there's some real teeth in
it. But onward...

(2) Distracting Environment

Much of Carr's points in his original Atlantic article "Is Google Making Us
Stupid?" and later in his book The Shallows are (2) type objections. Roughly
speaking, you can view Carr's point (and the research he points to that suggests
his point is valid) as something akin to the well-known psychological result
that people faced with endless choices tend to report less intrinsic
satisfaction in their lives. It's like that on the Web, roughly. If I can read
my email, take in a number of tweets, get Facebook updates, field some IM, and
execute a dozen searches all in fifteen minutes, it's hard to see in practical
terms how I'm doing anything, well, deep. Any real cognitive activity that
requires focus and concentration is already in pretty bad straights in this type
of I-can-have-anything-all-the-time information environment. And, again, for
those tempted to play the instrumentalist card (where we argue that in theory we
can concentrate, we just need to discipline ourselves online), we have a growing
number of brain and behavioral studies surfacing that suggest the problem is
actually intrinsic to the Web environment. In other words, we can't just "try
harder" to stay on track (though it's hard to see how this would hurt); there's
something about our connection to information on the Web that actively mitigates
against contemplation and concentration of the kind required to really,
thoroughly engage or learn something. As Carr summarizes our condition, we're
in The Shallows. And since we're online more and more, day after day, we're
heading for more shallows.

(3) Trivial Content

Much of Lanier's arguments in his You Are Not a Gadget are explorations of (3). 
Likewise, someone like former tech-guy Andrew Keen advances objections of the
Trivial Content sort in his The Cult of the Amateur. As I think Lanier's
observations are more trenchant, we'll stick mostly to his ideas. Trivial
Content is really at the heart of what I wish to advance in this piece,
actually, so to this we'll turn in the next section.

Whoops! Idiocracy