---
layout: post
title: "Prediction Markets"
date: 2010-03-19
categories: theory theory.prediction
---

[This is a draft from a few months ago, but I'm posting it in hopes that it'll
prompt me to finish it. Maybe it will stimulate someone to want to hear more
(or, do YOU want to finish it? If so, get a copy of "Infotopia" by Harvard Law
prof Cass Sunstein, if you haven't already. I'm basically summarizing his
arguments here.).]

Prediction Markets are a fancy name for the age-old idea of betting on future
events or outcomes, or "putting your money where your mouth is", in other words.
In a prediction market, participants can place bets on whether, say, health care
will pass, or whether Obama will get re-elected (if he runs), or (more
controversially) when the next major terrorist incident will occur on American
soil, and so on. Researchers have found in recent years that Prediction Markets
are remarkably accurate. In many cases, they outperform the predictions of
subject matter experts, and other types of group-aggregation predictors like
polls, or deliberative groups. For example, the Iowa Electronic Markets, run by
the University of Iowa since 1998, is a popular prediction market that has
psroven effective in guessing election outcomes. The IEM results had Bush with
50.45% of the vote, and Kerry with 49.55%, compared to the actual 51.56% for
Bush and 48.44% for Kerry. The result, based simply on people placing bets on
the final outcome of the election, outperformed professional polling results.

The question is, why? Why is betting such a powerful tool for predicting the
future? Participants in Prediction Markets&mdash;bettors&mdash;don't have to
have a Ph.D. in the electoral process; they don't have to have access to special
information; they don't really need any credentials at all, short of agreeing to
partipate by putting up some initial money and hoping to get more by guessing
correctly. And yet, collectively, the Prediction Markets often outperform the
experts.

The story of why Prediction Markets (hereafter PMs) work so well is best told by
telling another story, one of how deliberative groups often don't work well. In
a deliberative group, members, well, deliberate: they discuss and analyze some
topic or set of possible outcomes and decide on a course of action, or a most
likely outcome, or a best policy, depending on what is getting deliberated.
Deliberative groups often do produce good outcomes (perhaps the most famous
example of the success of deliberation is the ratification of the American
Constitution, where sustained discussion about the details of the Constitution
resulted in the document we have today).