---
layout: post
title: "Joe versus The Liberal"
date: 2010-03-19
categories: politics
---

Put this in the "off the cuff observation" bucket:

Like many of us, I discuss politics fairly frequently with friends and
colleagues, many of whom are left-leaning or liberal (they are pro-choice, for
universal health care, worried about global warming, sceptical about corporate
America, and so on). 

Over the years I've noticed a pattern of subtle (sometimes not so subtle)
snickering with regard to "Tea Party" types, or what we used to call the "Nascar
crowd". I'll admit to enjoying a little snickering about "them" myself. Why? 
Because&mdash;so the stereotype goes&mdash;they're the types that forward stupid
chain emails about how Obama's not a U.S. Citizen, who have goofy bumper
stickers about the inferiority of Ford on the back of their Chevy pickup, who
work the blue collar jobs and get WAY too excited about football games, beer
drinking, and BBQ. They think Palin would be a good President. They're all
about patriotism (defined mostly as America the Strong Military, the "Ass
Kickin'" America), plain speaking folks, SUVs, baseball games on the weekends
for the kids, and country music. They distrust egghead intellectuals ("He can
talk, but can he change a tire?"), government bureaucrats who want to raise
their taxes, and, above all, anything that smacks of what "liberals" might say
or do. 

So, The Liberal tends to snicker at these types (which makes a certain sense,
since these types don't like him much, and The Liberal knows it). But what is
the meaning of the snicker? The snickering&mdash;and scoffing, harumphing, and
guffawing&mdash;is damn peculiar, actually, because if we remove the political
differences, many of the Tea Party/Nascar folks are not rich, well-to-do types
who might feel targeted by liberal social or economic policy changes. They're
Joe the Plumber types, making a modest income, having less than the best health
care, and less than the best opportunities for higher education, and on and on. 
Many of them would stand to gain, in fact, from the very policies that The
Liberal espouses: less taxes on working folks, more on rich folk. Health care
for little Johnny. Tax credits for education, and so on. Somehow, though,
Average Joe American doesn't seem to want any of it, and he receives a snicker
from The Liberal as his reward. 

So, the situation is peculiar, on its face, because Average Joe American seems
to despise policy that, ostensibly at least, would seem beneficial to him, and
The Liberal is caught snickering at the very common folk type about which he
professes such concern. The Liberal in fact talks incessantly about Americans
who are not rich, and who don't have all of the opportunities that well-to-do
Americans have. The Liberal seems worried half to death that CEOs are getting
all the attention, not the common worker. But who is Average Joe American, the
object of his snickering? He's a plumber, or a truck driver, or he works down
the road at the Walmart. He's not a CEO. He doesn't know squat about Wall
Street. He owns a pickup truck with 150 thousand miles on it. He has no 401K,
lives in a modest four bedroom house, and has two kids in the public school
system because he and his wife, a manager at Target, couldn't even begin to
afford private school. So, _why does The Liberal snicker_ (and why doesn't Joe
like The Liberal)? It's damn peculiar.

One explanation we can reject is: The Liberal snickers because Average Joe
American is conservative (he's pro-life, for low taxes, hawkish on defense,
thinks global warming is "fishy", and so on). We can reject this idea, because
The Liberal does _not_ snicker at educated conservatives; he just disagrees
with them. He might even get mad and flustered at them. But he doesn't
snicker.

And so the plot thickens. If it's not the _substance_ of the ideas, the
difference in the ideas between The Liberal and Average Joe, what is it? A
possible&mdash;if painful&mdash;explanation is that The Liberal snickers
because, deep down, he doesn't think Average Joe American is in his league. 
He's not as educated, he's probably not as smart, and he shouldn't be in charge
of anything&mdash;except perhaps the weekend little league tournament. This is,
of course, a very strange posture for The Liberal, because it's flatly in
tension with the self-absorbed, perpetual concern he has for
those-who-have-less. It's the plight of the working stiff that infuses The
Liberal with her energy, her sense of moral indignation. The Liberal is "all
about" those that are less fortunate, whether in monetary or educational or
other terms. "She didn't have an opportunity to go to college", "He can't
afford health care for his children", "Why doesn't the CEO give his bonus to his
share holders?", and on and on. The Liberal is talking about Average (or below
average) Joe American on the one hand all the time, while snickering at him on
the other.

So, to return, what is the meaning of the snicker? As I've explained, it can't
be that Average Joe American has conservative views. Many people have
conservative views, and those with liberal views are happy to engage them in
endless intellectual debates, with nary a snicker, or guffaw, or scoff. It must
be something about Joe. But what is it? Joe's a guy: are men to be snickered
at? Not really (The Liberal might be a "guy", too). Joe's white: are white
people properly snickerable? Well, no, it's more complicated, we hear. He's
not so rich: So? He's one of the have-nots, a "damn shame", in a country with
such wealth. So that's not it. But wait, Joe didn't go to college! Ha! That
must be it! He's uneducated! Snicker away! But not so fast again. We don't
ridicule people for their lack of education; we expand access. We make college
more affordable. We educate people about its benefits, and so on. 

And on and on. We're still nowhere explaining the snicker. What could it mean? 
I don't know, really. But I'll be mischievous and offer up the maarvelously
scaaandalous possibility I suggested earlier. Suppose that The Liberal&mdash;so
publically concerned about those with less education, and less money, and less
opportunity&mdash;really thinks, deep down, privately, that those kinds of folks
 _suck_ ? In this case, is the meaning of the snicker: don't you realize, you
idiot, that you're an uneducated working class stiff? Why don't you shut up,
and let us help you and your kind? (They are, you know, so fragile, but so
noble, in their plight. Didn't you read Rousseau? Oh no, of _course_ you
didn't.) This view, so cynical of course, would have the virtue of "making
sense of the data", as some scientifically-minded chap might say, receiving no
doubt a suspicious look from our Joe (who would never call anyone a "chap"). 
_Mmmm, dataaa_ , muses Joe, moments later. 
Ha!