---
layout: post
title: "Piper Says &quot;Pay&quot;"
date: 2010-04-21
categories: economy economy.tax economy.deficit
---

Conservative pundits weigh in on the Value Added Tax (VAT): WaPo rock stars 
[George
Will](http://www.realclearpolitics.com/articles/2010/04/18/if_vat_ditch_the_income_tax_105213.html)
 and 
[Krauthammer](http://www.realclearpolitics.com/articles/2010/03/26/the_vat_cometh_104936.html)
, [the
WSJ](http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052748704133804575198370425467284.html?mod=WSJ_Opinion_MIDDLETopOpinion)
, [the CATO
Institute](http://www.realclearpolitics.com/articles/2010/04/10/the_vat_is_a_terrible_idea_105114.html)
for starters. All of this in spite of [Press Secretary Gibbs' denial
Monday](http://wallstreetpit.com/24174-vat-is-not-under-consideration) .

What's the issue? Oh, the VAT is just that consumer tax that social democracies
like those in Western Europe have adopted to finance entitlements (aka their
"welfare states"). In theory, VATs are fairer than income taxes, because income
taxes shift the burden to specific income classes: in America the top 1% of
earners provide 40% of the income tax receipts, the top 5% provide 61%, while
the bottom 50% provide a mere 3%. This distribution stretches the limits of the
reasonableness of the "if you have more, you should pay more" idea, and as Will
points out, it creates a perverse incentive for a very large number of people to
remain phlegmatic about the expansion of government: "...the tax makes a
substantial majority complacent about government's growth.".

But the problem with the VAT, in practice, is that it's not intended to replace
or reduce income tax burdens, or to reduce income tax disparity between lower,
middle and upper incomes. Basically, the VAT would be JAT ("Just Another Tax")
for everyone&mdash;not just the rich folks&mdash;raising the cost of goods for
consumers rich and poor (exemptions like food etc.). It's just more taxes for
everyone, on top of the income taxes already owed.

Unfortunately, JAT may make sense today. The Europeans aren't stupid;
eventually, taxing just the rich isn't adequate to pay for the benefits and
entitlements given to all. Things just _get more expensive_ , a kind of
economic axiom that governments make their peace with (and try to disguise in
election years) in order to provide entitlements and programs for everyone.
Obama, and the rest of us, must soon make our peace with the cost of our own
government.