---
layout: post
title: "The Blonde Jihadist"
date: 2010-03-11
categories: issues.racialprofiling issues.terrorism
---

The indictment of Colleen LaRose, a 46 year old white woman who was charged with
providing material support to terrorists has raised, once again, some
interesting questions about racial or ethnic profiling. LaRose, aka "Jihad
Jane", converted to Islam "several years ago" according to law enforcement
officials and was involved in trying to recruit jihadists to kill Lars Vilks, a
cartoonist whose "depictions of the Prophet Muhammad incited protests by
Muslims".

Rachel Maddow at MSNBC has pointed to the case of LaRose as a clear example of
why racial profiling for law enforcement purposes is pointless and "stupid". 
Maddow's point, presumably, is that profiling _doesn't work_ , because when a
46 year old white woman with blonde hair can end up "Jihad Jane", it's clear
that not just young men of Arab descent are engaged in terrorist planning and
activities. Maddow, in other words, makes what I'll call the Effectiveness
Claim: profiling doesn't work because people outside the profile engage in
criminal or terrorist activities. This makes the profiling strategy bad,
because when looking for people who fit the profile, actual criminals or
terrorists could slip right by. Fair enough.

Whatever the merits of the Effectiveness Claim, however, it's doubtful that
Jihad Jane provides much confirmation of it. For one, LaRose is an outlier, an
abnormality, which is why she ended up on the Rachel Maddow in the first place
(if "she" had been a "he", from Saudi Arabia, say goodbye to MSNBC coverage). 
Outliers do not disprove statistical norms. Not every person who is a terrorist
will fit the profile, as even profilers agree. The rationale behind profiling
is that _most_ of the people who engage in some behavior will fit a profile,
or even that many will. The point is that the distribution of factors like
ethnicity, age, and gender in the population of terrorists are not simply
random. So, given the Effectiveness Claim, the LaRose case says nothing, since
we would expect outliers in any realistic sample of terrorists.

Second, the LaRose case is troubling for the Effectiveness Claim because,
recall, LaRose is a self-admitted Muslim. In this sense, then, she _fits_ a
profile of jihadist terrorist types rather than helps disconfirm one. She is,
in other words, another example of a Muslim engaging in jihadist terrorist
planning or activities. This of course doesn't show that all Muslims are
terrorists (certainly not true), or even that most or many Muslims are
terrorists. But it _does_ show that one more Muslim is a terrorist, and it 
_does not_ show that non-Muslims are terrorists, too.

So, the LaRose case does little, actually, for proponents of the Effectiveness
Claim, like (apparently) Maddow. What Maddow and others who oppose profiling
might want to argue instead is something I'll call the Moral Claim, which says
that because not all terrorists are members of a particular religion or
ethnicity or gender, even if many are, it is morally unacceptable to profile
people based on those factors. It's much harder to argue with the Moral Claim,
particularly when one recognizes the frustration and humiliation that wrongly
targeted people must feel when they find themselves victims of profiling.

Read story 
[here](http://www.cbc.ca/world/story/2010/03/10/jihad-jane-terror.html)
.