---
layout: post
title: "The Hypocritic Oaf"
date: 2010-02-28
categories: politics.healthcare politics issues.healthcare politics.reconciliation
---

Politicians talk a lot, and it's fair to say that most of their verbiage has the
overarching purpose of getting us&mdash; the American people, that is&mdash; to
agree with them; with the rightness of their actions and agendas. Securing our
agreement is important, of course, because in democracies the collective
approval or disapproval of the citizenry gets politicians hired or fired. As
Senate Republican newcomer Scott Brown pointed out in a debate in his now
successful Massachussetts Senatorial bid: "With all due respect, it's not the
Kennedy's seat, it's not the Democrats' seat, it's the people's seat". And so it
is.

One unfortunate consequence of talking so much, of convincing so much, of
arguing so much, however, is that politicians tend to fall in and out of
tensions and contradictions, almost daily. This has the unfortunate consequence
of pulling the rest of us into this sorry state of affairs, so that pundits and
media people and ordinary political junkies sympathetic with the latest views
espoused by Democrats or Republicans routinely end up arguing points that we
ourselves denounced weeks or months ago. The contours and lines of our
political debates keep forming and reforming around the different things the
politicians say.

Take Chris Matthews, of "Hardball" fame on MSNBC, for instance, who has recently
been warming up to supporting Senate Democrats' apparent intention to use
reconciliation&mdash;the budget procedure that relies on simple majority vote
(51%) to pass legislation in the Senate&mdash;to pass health care reform. On
January 25, Matthews excoriated Congressman Alan "keep Florida weird" Grayson
for proposing reconciliation for health reform. Said Matthews, with all of the
loud confidence of someone absolutely convinced of their own rectitude: "You
can't create a program through reconciliation" (he might have added, given his
tone, "and everyone knows that!"). Matthews then further clarified for the
Democratic Congressman the proper application of reconciliation, that it allows
one to change only "fiscal numbers", by using it either to "raise taxes", or "to
cut program spending".

Matthews, _circa_ January 25, put forward a view that many lawmakers have
agreed with, at one time or other anyway, and that seemed to provide a simple
heuristic for determining when reconciliation might be acceptable. Former Senate
leader Bill Frist, for instance, [writes in the
WSJ](http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052748704479404575087163975017470.html)
that he supported use of reconciliation for tax refunds in 2001 (he points out
that there was a budgetary surplus at the time), yet opposed it when Republicans
tried to use it to extend prescription drug coverage in Medicare, presumably
because program expansion is not the proper application of budget
reconciliation. (The Medicare Modernization Act, which Frist supported, passed
"through the normal legislative procedure" in 2003.) So it seems that there is,
in fact, a reasonable criterion for determining when to use reconciliation. It's
for budgetary adjustments (including, it seems, tax rates); it's not for
programs, new or expanded, like health care.

Yet, almost amazingly, as if one needs to first rub one's eyes to make sure it's
the same person, Matthews [returns to
reconciliation](http://newsbusters.org/blogs/noel-sheppard/2010/02/25/matthews-its-end-democratic-party-if-senate-doesnt-pass-healthcare-re)
when talking to Andrea Mitchell (MSNBC), on the day of the Health Care Summit,
February 25, 2010. Now, just one month later, Matthews is confident that health
care reform is "not a program". He assures us that "it is basically a financial
question, it's not a health question. How do we finance, at the federal level,
health care?". So this is New Matthews. It's not that reconciliation would be
used for _program expansion_ (which we all know, courtesy of Matthews last
month, that this is _not_ what reconciliation is intended for, and _everyone_
 knows that), it's that the Health Care bill currently debated in Congress is
not a program-level discussion at all, according to New Matthews. Presto! It's
now some obscure budgetary concern, and we ought therefore to use reconciliation
after all.

Now, if this magic trick was played only by Chris Matthews&mdash;who sometimes
exudes a school boy eagerness to prove to his guests and viewers that he knows
how politics works, and other times seems interested only in generating the sort
of heat that increases ratings&mdash;and maybe a few desparate Democrats in
Congress, we might hold out hope for some fact, some objective Truth about
Reconciliation we could use to decide between Old Matthews and New Matthews. We
might hold out hope for a way to move forward. But, depressingly, digging
further one discovers that statements about the proper use of reconciliation
over the years are even more contorted than Matthews, and likely to encourage
yet more cynicism.

For instance, in April 2005, Democrats in Congress, discussing tax cuts proposed
by the Bush administration, seemed almost enraged by the suggestion that
reconciliation might be used at all, for tax cutting or anything else. Then
Senator Obama, for example, warned ominously that use of reconciliation might
"change the character of the Senate forever", resulting in "majoritarian
absolute power on either side", which is "not what the Founders intended". And
Hillary Clinton castigated President Bush about his reconciliation plans,
warning against his foolish, childish, and sure to be destructive desire to just
"change the rules, do it the way I want it done". It's a "bridge too far", she
fulminates. "Restrain yourself". New York Senator Charles Schumer joins in,
taking up the dire "our Union is at stake" tone struck by Senator Obama: "We are
on the precipice of a crisis, a Constitutional Crisis. The checks and balances
which have been at the core of this Republic, are about to be evaporated, by the
Nuclear Option". And, interestingly, no less than current Senate leader Harry
Reid weighed in on this dangerous technique, arguing against reconciliation
(again on deep Consitutional grounds), pointing out that the "filibuster serves
as a check on power and preserves our limited government".

Okay, history lesson over; back to our present concern, health care. On this
issue Mr. Reid says flatly, as early as November last year, that ["Iâ€™m not
using
reconciliation"](http://tpmdc.talkingpointsmemo.com/2009/11/reid-on-passing-health-care-im-not-using-reconciliation.php)
, which squares with his zeal for supermajorities and filibusters back in 2005,
but fast forward a few months, and his office now announces that [it's a "real
possibility"](http://theplumline.whorunsgov.com/health-care/breaking-reid-signals-support-for-reconciliation-vote-on-public-option/)
. And it seems President Obama has recovered from his grave concerns about
majoritarian government thwarting what the Founders intended, and is now
apparently [preparing for the reconciliation
process](http://www.politico.com/livepulse/0210/Obama_Reid_Pelosi_committed_to_reconciliation__Tanden_leaving_administration__Medicaid_enrollment_hi.html?showall#)
with House leader Pelosi and Reid. Of course, Left-leaning Schumer now supports
reconciliation (again, he's recovered from all that "Constitutional crisis"
business that had him apoplectic in 2005), and while Ms. Clinton is out of the
line of fire on domestic issues as Secretary of State, it's reasonable to assume
that she's much more sanguine about the Congress, and the Administration,
controlling itself and resisting the stupid "my way or the highway" urge to
improperly use reconciliation that she had to endure in the Bush years as
Senator of New York. My, how times do change.

At any rate, my central thesis here is that politicians say a lot, and much of
what they say is contradictory, and that if we're not careful, the rest of us
will get sucked into cheerleading for them (and so the rest of us will end up
promulgating contradictory views, like Old and New Matthews, which is bad).
Exactly how all of this happens, again and again, is somewhat of a mystery to
me. For instance, how is it that partisan politicians and their supporters seem
always to believe that only the Other Side has these embarrassing problems with
consistency and hypocrisy, never them? How is it, for example, that liberal
blogs like [Think Progress](http://thinkprogress.org/) can finger point at
Republicans who used reconciliation in years past, but who now oppose it with
health care (as if Think Progress had ferreted out the one true case of
inconsistency in the current debate). Such analysis of course blithely
disregards the reasonable-sounding distinction between past uses of
reconciliation for budgetary matters (including taxation rates) and the current
interest in its use for social program expansion. It ignores moderate Democrats
who express concern about the use of reconciliation for health care. It ignores
the dire concern of Democrats, including Obama himself, when discussing
reconciliation not five years ago. Think Progress doesn't seem concerned about
any of this, because the hypocrisy is all _over there_ , with the Republicans,
you see. There's no need to think about it any further.

So, it's hard not to get cynical. Who cares what they say? The debate just keeps
moving along, contradictions, hypocrisy, and all. As Left Wing comedian Bill
Mahrer recently asked on his "Real Time" show on HBO, revealing marvelous
ignorance of the history of reconciliation: "what's wrong with a simple vote?".
What _is_ wrong with a simple vote, anyway? Perhaps he might have asked Mr.
Obama that in
2005.