---
layout: post
title: "Not Equal As In Math (and also not really equal at all)"
date: 2010-05-01
categories: issues.globalwarming issues.immigration politics person.lindseygraham
---

Senator Lindsey Graham [assures us that he cares
equally](http://politic365.com/2010/04/30/climate-change-legislation-faces-more-hurdles/)
for the immigration and climate change issues. This is manifestly an odd
statement, even allowing for the colloquial quality and inexactness of much
natural language. There are all _sorts_ of reasons one should try harder to be
more worried about one of these than the other: if you were a catastrophe type
of the Gore stripe, for instance, you'd presumably care a helluva lot more about
failing to address the warming planet than you would a political issue like
immigration reform. (Global catastrophic disaster versus an ongoing issue with
undocumented immigrants, I mean.)

If, on the other hand, you were skeptical&mdash;like the majority of
Americans&mdash;about the veracity of the Global Warming notion in the first
place(the hypothesis that the warming of the Earth is or will become
destructive, and that it is human-caused), you'd likely care more about the 
<span id="SPELLING_ERROR_0" class="blsp-spelling-error"> socio </span>
-economic-political consequences of the immigration issue than speculative
scientific views about possible outcomes driven by folks with one foot in <span
id="SPELLING_ERROR_1" class="blsp-spelling-error"> atmospheric </span> science
and the other in politics. Not much use getting worked up about catastrophes
that aren't really going to happen.

And so the issue here is not Graham's implausible _<span id="SPELLING_ERROR_2"
class="blsp-spelling-error"> ceteris </span> <span id="SPELLING_ERROR_3"
class="blsp-spelling-error"> paribus </span>_ exhortation to curry favor with
voters (which means: everyone who was listening to him), but rather a somewhat
deeper issue about science, that it's still and I suppose necessarily, and
essentially, about what's true, and so our degree of belief in scientific claims
is largely still what matters when determining how much we care. Senator Graham,
for his part, just cares a damn lot, and equally so. But for the rest of us,
whether we believe, in some robust apolitical sense, that a claim is factual or
not, weighs heavily on how much value we give issues that rely on these claims
for their moral or ethical force. It determines, in other words, how much we'll
care about them.

**Coda** 

Fair readers of this blog, you've now been armed with the tools of reason. The
next time a Global Warming Alarmist accuses you of not caring, cheerfully agree
that, yes, in fact _you don't care much_ . And the reason of course is that you
don't have a strong belief in the factual claims, and hence the issue itself is
a dubious recipient of your care. (When this elicits howls of protest about
taking care of the planet, tell them that you DO care about THIS issue. Then
you'll have owned the part that matters&mdash;the environment does require our
care&mdash;and jettisoned the stupid politics of alarmist science, pushing the
speculative theory part back to the controlling alarmist, keeping the General
Environment issue that she wanted to invoke, shiftily, as proof of your moral
turpitude. If she then counters with something about "leaving it to the
scientific experts", point out that many experts actually disagree on this issue
(which is quite true), and ask which experts we should "leave it to". This will
likely elicit a pathetic response about "many more think it's true than not", to
which you inquire about whether scientific facts are properly established by
popular vote. If this leads into the weeds, just ask the alarmist to name
another scientific theory that is considered established in the same sense as
the Global Warming <span id="SPELLING_ERROR_4" class="blsp-spelling-corrected">
Catastrophe </span> theory. This is a devastating question, because if she's
honest, she'll have to abandon hard science completely, and the discussion will
end up with something squishy like economic theory. At this point you've won,
though the Alarmist may hang on for a while if only out of stubbornness. Don't
worry about this, though, because you're a _<span id="SPELLING_ERROR_5"
class="blsp-spelling-error"> wascally </span> wabbit_ for the control-minded
alarmist at this point, and even if she grumbles or blusters a bit, she'll soon
sulk away to find some easier target. But it won't be you, not anymore. Because
you're armed. You're ready.
Really.)