---
layout: post
title: ""
date: 2007-10-08
categories: 
---

Introduction 

- Two possibilities: greater prosperity, large scale, continuous conflict
(nonzero) 

. more than ever, both options are real - why? 

. world is tightly coupled: greater interdependencies mean greater potential
benefit (nonzero games), but potential for catastrophy on much larger scale 

- Because things are more complicated, things are harder to explain and predict
now, not easier 

. IT gives us information without context 

. we have to make sense of it, and there's much more now to make sense of 

. we are making culture like nonlinear systems in nature: we things grow more
connected and more complex, the application of lawlike generalizations capture
less and less in this world. we can't see into the future. 

- One theory is that the pace of innovation is accelerating, and therefore our
ability to offload our intelligence onto machines - to use technology to help us
explain and predict - will increase as well "the singularity is near" 

. this is based on a misunderstanding of the nature of human intelligence, which
is fundamentally about relevance. 

. Abduction is distinctively human, induction and deduction the domain of
computers 

. the life blood of prediction in the real world - the messy world of facts and
not abstractions - is insight based on experience. it is not the application of
generalizations 

- Generalizations are the product of human reason, and there are very good
reasons to hold them in high regard. However, the world of generalizations is
not the world of everyday experience. Generalizations don't allow us to explain
and predict the world we live in. 

- Contra the Enlightenment Myth, there are really two realms: one realm is
essentially one of exceptions to laws, the other, a realm described by them. 

- It has been a strange, persistent feature of modern life that the conceptual
divide between the types of reasoning required for the two worlds has been
obscured. In particular: 

. The incrementalist notion is wrong (Kurzweil). There are no smart boxes
given what we understand of computation and common sense inference (holism?) 

. The development of modern science - a triumph of human reason over religious
views and of teleological orthodoxy - was only briefly about mechanism but is
unfortunately lodged in this model in spite of substantial evidence to the
contrary (quantum physics). In particular, the notion that all is functions and
structures, including consciousness itself, is baseless. 

- The picture that emerges is not at odds with modern science but rather its
next logical progression. We have two known features: intelligence and
consciousness - and they are the key to understanding how best to manage the
tightly coupled systems we have created today. 

. Laws won't help us see into the future. We have rather our own insight and
experience aided by technologies. 

. At the end of the book I'll say something about the consciousness debate and
how we can ground a robust notion of purpose in the fact that all is likely not
material. This is not to say, by the way, that organized religion is the
answer, nor is it to espouse a particular world view that corresponds with a
particular religion. That is not my aim. It is to say rather that we have
reason to believe that there is something special about us, and that we there is
a point to meeting challenges and striving to obtain higher and better systems. 
 

- Application. The point of all of this is to say that we're wasting time. We
need to embrace a "two boxes" view. How best to see into the future? Taht is an
abductive question assisted by technologies. The real of law is another box. 
It doesn't help us predict in the common sense world, but it does provide us a
mathematical description of the world.