---
layout: post
title: "Two Worlds"
date: 2007-10-01
categories: phoenix.prediction
---

The physical world is a pretty robust notion for most people, and so also is the
mental world, the realm of thoughts, feelings, beliefs, and what philosopher
David Chalmers calls qualia, the qualitative "feel" of things as they appear to
us: the taste of fine red wine, the sharp sting of a needle, the smell of a
rose.

Philosophers have debated for centuries whether the two worlds are really the
same, whether mental phenomena are really physical phenomena (and so, one could,
in principle reduce the mental to the physical). The arrow runs the other way as
well, although less frequently: might the physical world be just aspects of the
more fundamental mental world? Spinoza thought so; so too Berkely.

We can set the metaphysics aside however, because for practical purposes it
makes perfect sense to speak of objects with minds, and objects without them. If
I think you have a mind, I treat you differently than a rock, or a piano.
(Daniel Dennet called this taking a "stance" toward something: we take an 
_intentional stance_ toward entities that we think are best understood in terms
of intentions and willful actions.)

So we have the Physical World, consisting of matter, energy, and the physical
objects we perceive in our world and in the universe (including animals and
humans considered qua physical objects, e.g., the human with name "John Smith"
weighing 180 pounds). We also have the Intentional World, consisting of agents:
physical objects with some internal capacity for having beliefs about the world
and acting on those beliefs. Aristotle talked about humans as the "rational
animal" and we can use the term without worrying about details to circumscribe
what exists in the Intentional World (there might also be rational animals that
are not humans, such as aliens. Some would argue to include certain smart
mammals, like apes, but I won't broach that issue here).

So, the intentional world is full of beliefs and purposes and decisions. If
President Bush vetoes a bill, his decision (based presumably on some set of
beliefs he has about the content of the bill, the result of its passing, and so
on) is a part of him qua rational animal. We talk about a decision to veto by an
intentional agent as an event occuring in the Intentional World.

On the other hand, his hand must move to grasp a pen, the pen must be relocated
in time and space so that pen marks can be inscribed on the paper at the right
place, the ink must transfer from the pen to the paper in such a way as to form
a signature, and so on. These are all events in the Physical World.

Examples like this and scores of others, easily concocted from any day to day
event in our lives, show that intentional agents constant interact with the
physical world, and events in the physical world are constant causing changes in
the intentional world.

An intriquing question is that of the predictability of events occuring in the
Physical World either including intentional events or without them. An avalanche
is a physical event, and presumably its prediction involves a set of prior
conditions, laws about pressure, temperature, the freezing point of water, and
so on. A snowmobiler who decides to attempt to summit a mountain during
dangerous conditions, thereby causing an avalanche is an intentional event. The
decision is intentional. The snowmobile is physical. And so it is that we are
constantly causing physical events by acting in the physical world, and causing
mental events (new beliefs about the world, new decisions to plan or act) based
on events we perceive in teh physical world around us.

The significance of all of this philosophical exposition of hapless
snowmobilers, vetoes, and the like is just that we want to predict how the world
will change tomorrow given what we know about these worlds. (Global Warming is a
large scale example of the connectedness of these two worlds, at least on one
popular reading.)

How do we predict what will happen in the physical world? How do I predict what
you will do? How can we predict what Iraq's parliament will do? Or Al-Queda?
It's tempting to just say "we can't, it's too complex", and the answer if a bit
cynical is nonetheless not far off of the mark. But it remains that we have some
ability to see likely outcomes, given what we observe and what we know. It is
highly likely, for instance, that Al-Qaeda will attempt, at some point, another
terrorist attack. Exactly where, when, and how is the sort of knowledge we'd
like to have, of course. Suffice it here to say nonetheless that we can see into
the future, if only we are modest with regard to
precision.