---
layout: post
title: "Underwriting principles"
date: 2007-10-01
categories: 
---

What underwrites the trio: stabilization of the Middle East, developing
renewable energy technologies, and embracing globalization? 

Some principles: 

1. History has a purpose. Nonzero games (globalization). 

2. Dependence on oil fosters terrorism, and raises the costs of globalization
(by increasing transportation costs). Oil is an impediment to nonzero
interaction. It literally is keeping progress down. 

3. We cannot allow a 12th century view of the world to monopolize social and
political structures in the entire Middle East. We have a stake in promoting
democracy. Minimally, we have a stake in fostering stable democratic or at least
non-despotic rule in Iraq. "Getting out" is just an emotional reaction against
those who "got us in". We are there now, and we must use the occupation of Iraq
in a way that promotes first world values. The exact policies we should enact
are beyone the scope of this book. Suffice it here to say that the "going in"
and "getting out" views are manifestations of the calcified debates that have
become modern discourse. The debate over Iraq needs to proceed from the new
framework, which means we must, practically, speaking devise strategy based on T
principles that will, given the context, have the best chance at resulting in a
positive outcome. Unburdened by need to be right, but simply trying to solve
the problem given what we can reasonable infer about likely outcomes, we ought
thus to proceed. 

A quick sketch of the horizon of prediction with regard to conflict ought to
convince us that a hasty withdrawal is simply foolhardy: 

vietnam 

afghanistan (resurgence of taliban) 

others 

We cannot, of course predict the future. And it is right to say that, quite
bluntly, no one really knows. But given what we do know and what we can expect
based on experience on factual considerations, we ought to maintian a military
imposed stability in Iraq until such time as a reasonable outcome becomes
probable, rather than wishful thinking. Given practical reasoning of this sort,
unburdened by the "rights talk", we simply assess the situation based on a
shared understanding of our purpose, implement the plan, and (of course) hope
for the best (it's still war, after all). 

The first world in general ought to embrace reason as its model. It is not in
contradistinction to religion, in so far as the modernist interpretation of
sacred texts is invoked.